Mr. Sherlock Holmes Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who was usually very late in themornings, save upon those not infrequent occasions whenhe was up all night, was seated at the breakfast table. Istood upon the hearth-rug and picked up the stick whichour visitor had left behind him the night before. It was afine, thick piece of wood, bulbous-headed, of the sortwhich is known as a `Penang lawyer.' Just under the headwas a broad silver band nearly an inch across. `To JamesMortimer, M.R.C.S., from his friends of the C.C.H.,' wasengraved upon it, with the date `1884.' It was just such astick as the old-fashioned family practitioner used tocarry--dignified, solid, and reassuring. `Well, Watson, what do you make of it?' Holmes was sitting with his back to me, and I hadgiven him no sign of my occupation. `How did you know what I was doing? I believe youhave eyes in the back of your head.' `I have, at least, a well-polished, silver-plated coffee-potin front of me,' said he. `But, tell me, Watson, what doyou make of our visitor's stick? Since we have been sounfortunate as to miss him and have no notion of hiserrand, this accidental souvenir becomes of importance.Let me hear you reconstruct the man by an examinationof it.' `I think,' said I, following as far as I could the methodsof my companion, `that Dr. Mortimer is a successful,elderly medical man, well-esteemed since those whoknow him give him this mark of their appreciation.' `Good!' said Holmes. `Excellent!' `I think also that the probability is in favour of his beinga country practitioner who does a great deal of his visitingon foot.' `Why so?' `Because this stick, though originally a very handsomeone has been so knocked about that I can hardly imagine atown practitioner carrying it. The thick-iron ferrule isworn down, so it is evident that he has done a greatamount of walking with it.' `Perfectly sound!' said Holmes. `And then again, there is the `friends of the C.C.H.' Ishould guess that to be the Something Hunt, the localhunt to whose members he has possibly given somesurgical assistance, and which has made him a smallpresentation in return.' `Really, Watson, you excel yourself,' said Holmes,pushing back his chair and lighting a cigarette. `I ambound to say that in all the accounts which you have beenso good as to give of my own small achievements youhave habitually underrated your own abilities. It may bethat you are not yourself luminous, but you are aconductor of light. Some people without possessing geniushave a remarkable power of stimulating it. I confess, mydear fellow, that I am very much in your debt.' He had never said as much before, and I must admitthat his words gave me keen pleasure, for I had often beenpiqued by his indifference to my admiration and to theattempts which I had made to give publicity to hismethods. I was proud, too, to think that I had so farmastered his system as to apply it in a way which earnedhis approval. He now took the stick from my hands andexamined it for a few minutes with his naked eyes. Thenwith an expression of interest he laid down his cigarette,and carrying the cane to the window, he looked over itagain with a convex lens. `Interesting, though elementary,' said he as he returnedto his favourite corner of the settee. `There are certainlyone or two indications upon the stick. It gives us the basisfor several deductions.'  `Has anything escaped me?' I asked with some self-importance. `I trust that there is nothing of consequencewhich I have overlooked?'  `I am afraid, my dear Watson, that most of yourconclusions were erroneous. When I said that youstimulated me I meant, to be frank, that in noting yourfallacies I was occasionally guided towards the truth. Notthat you are entirely wrong in this instance. The man iscertainly a country practitioner. And he walks a gooddeal.'  `Then I was right.'  `To that extent.'  `But that was all.'  `No, no, my dear Watson, not all--by no means all. Iwould suggest, for example, that a presentation to a doctoris more likely to come from a hospital than from a hunt,and that when the initials `C.C.' are placed before thathospital the words `Charing Cross' very naturally suggestthemselves.'  `You may be right.'  `The probability lies in that direction. And if we takethis as a working hypothesis we have a fresh basis fromwhich to start our construction of this unknown visitor.' `Well, then, supposing that `C.C.H.' does stand for`Charing Cross Hospital,' what further inferences may wedraw?' `Do none suggest themselves? You know my methods.Apply them!' `I can only think of the obvious conclusion that theman has practised in town before going to the country.' `I think that we might venture a little farther than this.Look at it in this light. On what occasion would it bemost probable that such a presentation would be made?When would his friends unite to give him a pledge oftheir good will? Obviously at the moment when Dr.Mortimer withdrew from the service of the hospital inorder to start in practice for himself. We know there hasbeen a presentation. We believe there has been a changefrom a town hospital to a country practice. Is it, then,stretching our inference too far to say that the presentationwas on the occasion of the change?' `It certainly seems probable.' `Now, you will observe that he could not have been onthe staff of the hospital, since only a man well-establishedin a London practice could hold such a position, and sucha one would not drift into the country. What was he,then? If he was in the hospital and yet not on the staff hecould only have been a house-surgeon or a house-physician--little more than a senior student. And he leftfive years ago--the date is on the stick. So your grave,middle-aged family practitioner vanishes into thin air, mydear Watson, and there emerges a young fellow underthirty, amiable, unambitious, absent-minded, and thepossessor of a favourite dog, which I should describeroughly as being larger than a terrier and smaller than amastiff.' I laughed incredulously as Sherlock Holmes leanedback in his settee and blew little wavering rings of smokeup to the ceiling. `As to the latter part, I have no means of checking you,'said I, `but at least it is not difficult to find out a fewparticulars about the man's age and professional career.'From my small medical shelf I took down the MedicalDirectory and turned up the name. There were severalMortimers, but only one who could be our visitor. I readhis record aloud. `Mortimer,   James,   M.R.C.S.,  1882, Grimpen,Dartmoor, Devon. House-surgeon, from 1882 to 1884, atCharing Cross Hospital. Winner of the Jackson prize forComparative Pathology, with essay entitled `Is Disease aReversion?' Corresponding member of the SwedishPathological Society. Author of `Some Freaks of Atavism'(Lancet 1882). `Do We Progress?' (Journal of Psychology,March, 1883). Medical Officer for the parishes ofGrimpen, Thorsley, and High Barrow.' `No mention of that local hunt, Watson,' said Holmeswith a mischievous smile, `but a country doctor, as youvery astutely observed. I think that I am fairly justified inmy inferences. As to the adjectives, I said, if I rememberright, amiable, unambitious, and absent-minded. It is myexperience that it is only an amiable man in this worldwho receives testimonials, only an unambitious one whoabandons a London career for the country, and only anabsent-minded one who leaves his stick and not hisvisiting-card after waiting an hour in your room.' `And the dog?' `Has been in the habit of carrying this stick behind hismaster. Being a heavy stick the dog has held it tightly bythe middle, and the marks of his teeth are very plainlyvisible. The dog's jaw, as shown in the space betweenthese marks, is too broad in my opinion for a terrier andnot broad enough for a mastiff. It may have been--yes, byJove, it is a curly-haired spaniel.' He had risen and paced the room as he spoke. Now hehalted in the recess of the window. There was such a ringof conviction in his voice that I glanced up in surprise. `My dear fellow, how can you possibly be so sure ofthat?' `For the very simple reason that I see the dog himselfon our very door-step, and there is the ring of its owner.Don't move, I beg you, Watson. He is a professionalbrother of yours, and your presence may be of assistanceto me. Now is the dramatic moment of fate, Watson,when you hear a step upon the stair which is walking intoyour life, and you know not whether for good or ill. Whatdoes Dr. James Mortimer, the man of science, ask ofSherlock Holmes, the specialist in crime? Come in!' The appearance of our visitor was a surprise to me,since I had expected a typical country practitioner. He wasa very tall, thin man, with a long nose like a beak, whichjutted out between two keen, gray eyes, set closelytogether and sparkling brightly from behind a pair of gold-rimmed glasses. He was clad in a professional but ratherslovenly fashion, for his frock-coat was dingy and histrousers frayed. Though young, his long back was alreadybowed, and he walked with a forward thrust of his headand a general air of peering benevolence. As he entered hiseyes fell upon the stick in Holmes's hand, and he rantowards it with an exclamation of joy. `I am so very glad,'said he. `I was not sure whether I had left it here or in theShipping Office. I would not lose that stick for the world.'  `A presentation, I see,' said Holmes.  `Yes, sir.'  `From Charing Cross Hospital?'  `From one or two friends there on the occasion of mymarriage.'  `Dear, dear, that's bad!' said Holmes, shaking his head.  Dr. Mortimer blinked through his glasses in mildastonishment.  `Why was it bad?'  `Only that you have disarranged our little deductions.Your marriage, you say?'  `Yes, sir. I married, and so left the hospital, and with itall hopes of a consulting practice. It was necessary to makea home of my own.'  `Come, come, we are not so far wrong, after all,' saidHolmes. `And now, Dr. James Mortimer ------`  `Mister, sir, Mister--a humble M.R.C.S.'  `And a man of precise mind, evidently.'  `A dabbler in science, Mr. Holmes, a picker up of shellson the shores of the great unknown ocean. I presume thatit is Mr. Sherlock Holmes whom I am addressing and not------`  `No, this is my friend Dr. Watson.'  `Glad to meet you, sir. I have heard your namementioned in connection with that of your friend. Youinterest me very much, Mr. Holmes. I had hardlyexpected so dolichocephalic a skull or such well-markedsupra-orbital development. Would you have any objectionto my running my finger along your parietal fissure? A castof your skull, sir, until the original is available, would bean ornament to any anthropological museum. It is not myintention to be fulsome, but I confess that I covet yourskull.'  Sherlock Holmes waved our strange visitor into a chair.`You are an enthusiast in your line of thought, I perceive,sir, as I am in mine,' said he. `I observe from yourforefinger that you make your own cigarettes. Have nohesitation in lighting one.'  The man drew out paper and tobacco and twirled theone up in the other with surprising dexterity. He hadlong, quivering fingers as agile and restless as the antennaeof an insect.  Holmes was silent, but his little darting glances showedme the interest which he took in our curious companion. `I presume, sir,' said he at last, `that it was not merelyfor the purpose of examining my skull that you have doneme the honour to call here last night and again to-day?' `No, sir, no; though I am happy to have had theopportunity of doing that as well. I came to you, Mr.Holmes, because I recognized that I am myself anunpractical man and because I am suddenly confrontedwith  a  most   serious  and  extraordinary  problem.Recognizing, as I do, that you are the second highestexpert in Europe ------` `Indeed, sir! May I inquire who has the honour to bethe first?' asked Holmes with some asperity. `To the man of precisely scientific mind the work ofMonsieur Bertillon must always appeal strongly.' `Then had you not better consult him?' `I said, sir, to the precisely scientific mind. But as apractical man of affairs it is acknowledged that you standalone. I trust, sir, that I have not inadvertently ------` `Just a little,' said Holmes. `I think, Dr. Mortimer, youwould do wisely if without more ado you would kindlytell me plainly what the exact nature of the problem is inwhich you demand my assistance.'         
    The Curse of the Baskervilles `I have in my pocket a manuscript,' said Dr. JamesMortimer. `I observed it as you entered the room,' said Holmes. `It is an old manuscript.' `Early eighteenth century, unless it is a forgery.' `How can you say that, sir?' `You have presented an inch or two of it to myexamination all the time that you have been talking. Itwould be a poor expert who could not give the date of adocument within a decade or so. You may possibly haveread my little monograph upon the subject. I put that at1730.' `The exact date is 1742.' Dr. Mortimer drew it from hisbreast-pocket. `This family paper was committed to mycare by Sir Charles Baskerville, whose sudden and tragicdeath some three months ago created so much excitementin Devonshire. I may say that I was his personal friend aswell as his medical attendant. He was a strong-mindedman, sir, shrewd, practical, and as unimaginative as I ammyself. Yet he took this document very seriously, and hismind was prepared for just such an end as did eventuallyovertake him.'  Holmes stretched out his hand for the manuscript andflattened it upon his knee.  `You will observe, Watson, the alternative use of thelong s and the short. It is one of several indications whichenabled me to fix the date.'  I looked over his shoulder at the yellow paper and thefaded script. At the head was written: `Baskerville Hall,'and below in large, scrawling figures: `1742.'  `It appears to be a statement of some sort.'  `Yes, it is a statement of a certain legend which runs inthe Baskerville family.'  `But I understand that it is something more modernand practical upon which you wish to consult me?'  `Most modern. A most practical, pressing matter, whichmust be decided within twenty-four hours. But themanuscript is short and is intimately connected with theaffair. With your permission I will read it to you.'  Holmes leaned back in his chair, placed his finger-tipstogether, and closed his eyes, with an air of resignation.Dr. Mortimer turned the manuscript to the light and readin a high, cracking voice the following curious, old-worldnarrative:-- `Of the origin of  therehave been many statements, yet as I come in a direct linefrom Hugo Baskerville, and as I had the story from myfather, who also had it from his, I have set it down with allbelief that it occurred even as is here set forth. And Iwould have you believe, my sons, that the same Justicewhich punishes sin may also most graciously forgive it, andthat no ban is so heavy but that by prayer and repentanceit may be removed. Learn then from this story not to fearthe fruits of the past, but rather to be circumspect in thefuture, that those foul passions whereby our family hassuffered so grievously may not again be loosed to ourundoing. `Know then that in the time of the Great Rebellion(the history of which by the learned Lord Clarendon Imost earnestly commend to your attention) this Manor ofBaskerville was held by Hugo of that name, nor can it begainsaid that he was a most wild, profane, and godlessman. This, in truth, his neighbours might have pardoned,seeing that saints have never flourished in those parts, butthere was in him a certain wanton and cruel humourwhich made his name a byword through the West. Itchanced that this Hugo came to love (if, indeed, so dark apassion may be known under so bright a name) thedaughter of a yeoman who held lands near the Baskervilleestate. But the young maiden, being discreet and of goodrepute, would ever avoid him, for she feared his evilname. So it came to pass that one Michaelmas this Hugo,with five or six of his idle and wicked companions, stoledown upon the farm and carried off the maiden, her fatherand brothers being from home, as he well knew. Whenthey had brought her to the Hall the maiden was placed inan upper chamber, while Hugo and his friends sat down toa long carouse, as was their nightly custom. Now, thepoor lass upstairs was like to have her wits turned at thesinging and shouting and terrible oaths which came up toher from below, for they say that the words used by HugoBaskerville, when he was in wine, were such as might blastthe man who said them. At last in the stress of her fear shedid that which might have daunted the bravest or mostactive man, for by the aid of the growth of ivy whichcovered (and still covers) the south wall she came downfrom under the eaves, and so homeward across the moor,there being three leagues betwixt the Hall and her father'sfarm. `It chanced that some little time later Hugo left hisguests to carry food and drink--with other worse things,perchance--to his captive, and so found the cage emptyand the bird escaped. Then, as it would seem, he becameas one that hath a devil, for, rushing down the stairs intothe dining-hall, he sprang upon the great table, flagons andtrenchers flying before him, and he cried aloud before allthe company that he would that very night render hisbody and soul to the Powers of Evil if he might butovertake the wench. And while the revellers stood aghastat the fury of the man, one more wicked or, it may be,more drunken than the rest, cried out that they should putthe hounds upon her. Whereat Hugo ran from the house,crying to his grooms that they should saddle his mare andunkennel the pack, and giving the hounds a kerchief ofthe maid's, he swung them to the line, and so off full cryin the moonlight over the moor. `Now, for some space the revellers stood agape, unableto understand all that had been done in such haste. Butanon their bemused wits awoke to the nature of the deedwhich was like to be done upon the moorlands.Everything was now in an uproar, some calling for theirpistols, some for their horses, and some for another flask ofwine. But at length some sense came back to their crazedminds, and the whole of them, thirteen in number, tookhorse and started in pursuit. The moon shone clear abovethem, and they rode swiftly abreast, taking that coursewhich the maid must needs have taken if she were toreach her own home. `They had gone a mile or two when they passed one ofthe night shepherds upon the moorlands, and they cried tohim to know if he had seen the hunt. And the man, as thestory goes, was so crazed with fear that he could scarcespeak, but at last he said that he had indeed seen theunhappy maiden, with the hounds upon her track. `But Ihave seen more than that,' said he, `for Hugo Baskervillepassed me upon his black mare, and there ran mute behindhim such a hound of hell as God forbid should ever be atmy heels.' So the drunken squires cursed the shepherd androde onward. But soon their skins turned cold, for therecame a galloping across the moor, and the black mare,dabbled with white froth, went past with trailing bridleand empty saddle. Then the revellers rode close together,for a great fear was on them, but they still followed overthe moor, though each, had he been alone, would havebeen right glad to have turned his horse's head. Ridingslowly in this fashion they came at last upon the hounds.These, though known for their valour and their breed,were whimpering in a cluster at the head of a deep dip orgoyal, as we call it, upon the moor, some slinking awayand some, with starting hackles and staring eyes, gazingdown the narrow valley before them. `The company had come to a halt, more sober men, asyou may guess, than when they started. The most of themwould by no means advance, but three of them, theboldest, or it may be the most drunken, rode forwarddown the goyal. Now, it opened into a broad space inwhich stood two of those great stones, still to be seenthere, which were set by certain forgotten peoples in thedays of old. The moon was shining bright upon theclearing, and there in the centre lay the unhappy maidwhere she had fallen, dead of fear and of fatigue. But itwas not the sight of her body, nor yet was it that of thebody of Hugo Baskerville lying near her, which raised thehair upon the heads of these three daredevil roysterers, butit was that, standing over Hugo, and plucking at his throat,there stood a foul thing, a great, black beast, shaped like ahound, yet larger than any hound that ever mortal eye hasrested upon. And even as they looked the thing tore thethroat out of Hugo Baskerville, on which, as it turned itsblazing eyes and dripping jaws upon them, the threeshrieked with fear and rode for dear life, still screaming,across the moor. One, it is said, died that very night ofwhat he had seen, and the other twain were but brokenmen for the rest of their days. `Such is the tale, my sons, of the coming of the houndwhich is said to have plagued the family so sorely eversince. If I have set it down it is because that which isclearly known hath less terror than that which is buthinted at and guessed. Nor can it be denied that many ofthe family have been unhappy in their deaths, which havebeen sudden, bloody, and mysterious. Yet may we shelterourselves in the infinite goodness of Providence, whichwould not forever punish the innocent beyond that thirdor fourth generation which is threatened in Holy Writ. Tothat Providence, my sons, I hereby commend you, and Icounsel you by way of caution to forbear from crossingthe moor in those dark hours when the powers of evil areexalted. `[This from Hugo Baskerville to his sons Rodger andJohn, with instructions that they say nothing thereof totheir sister Elizabeth.]" When Dr. Mortimer had finished reading this singularnarrative he pushed his spectacles up on his forehead andstared across at Mr. Sherlock Holmes. The latter yawnedand tossed the end of his cigarette into the fire. `Well?' said he.  `Do you not find it interesting?'  `To a collector of fairy tales.'  Dr. Mortimer drew a folded newspaper out of hispocket.  `Now, Mr. Holmes, we will give you something a littlemore recent. This is the Devon County Chronicle of May14th of this year. It is a short account of the facts elicitedat the death of Sir Charles Baskerville which occurred afew days before that date.'  My friend leaned a little forward and his expressionbecame intent. Our visitor readjusted his glasses andbegan:--  `The recent sudden death of Sir Charles Baskerville,whose name has been mentioned as the probable Liberalcandidate for Mid-Devon at the next election, has cast agloom over the county. Though Sir Charles had resided atBaskerville Hall for a comparatively short period hisamiability of character and extreme generosity had wonthe affection and respect of all who had been brought intocontact with him. In these days of nouveaux riches it isrefreshing to find a case where the scion of an old countyfamily which has fallen upon evil days is able to make hisown fortune and to bring it back with him to restore thefallen grandeur of his line. Sir Charles, as is well known,made large sums of money in South African speculation.More wise than those who go on until the wheel turnsagainst them, he realized his gains and returned to Englandwith them. It is only two years since he took up hisresidence at Baskerville Hall, and it is common talk howlarge were  those  schemes  of reconstruction andimprovement which have been interrupted by his death.Being himself childless, it was his openly expressed desirethat the whole country-side should, within his ownlifetime, profit by his good fortune, and many will havepersonal reasons for bewailing his untimely end. Hisgenerous donations to local and county charities have beenfrequently chronicled in these columns. `The circumstances connected with the death of SirCharles cannot be said to have been entirely cleared up bythe inquest, but at least enough has been done to disposeof those rumours to which local superstition has given rise.There is no reason whatever to suspect foul play, or toimagine that death could be from any but natural causes.Sir Charles was a widower, and a man who may be said tohave been in some ways of an eccentric habit of mind. Inspite of his considerable wealth he was simple in hispersonal tastes, and his indoor servants at Baskerville Hallconsisted of a married couple named Barrymore, thehusband acting as butler and the wife as housekeeper.Their evidence, corroborated by that of several friends,tends to show that Sir Charles's health has for some timebeen impaired, and points especially to some affection ofthe heart, manifesting itself in changes of colour,breathlessness, and acute attacks of nervous depression. Dr.James Mortimer, the friend and medical attendant of thedeceased, has given evidence to the same effect. `The facts of the case are simple. Sir Charles Baskervillewas in the habit every night before going to bed ofwalking down the famous Yew Alley of Baskerville Hall.The evidence of the Barrymores shows that this had beenhis custom. On the 4th of May Sir Charles had declaredhis intention of starting next day for London, and hadordered Barrymore to prepare his luggage. That night hewent out as usual for his nocturnal walk, in the course ofwhich he was in the habit of smoking a cigar. He neverreturned. At twelve o'clock Barrymore, finding the halldoor still open, became alarmed, and, lighting a lantern,went in search of his master. The day had been wet, andSir Charles's footmarks were easily traced down the Alley.Half-way down this walk there is a gate which leads outon to the moor. There were indications that Sir Charleshad stood for some little time here. He then proceededdown the Alley, and it was at the far end of it that hisbody was discovered. One fact which has not beenexplained is the statement of Barrymore that his master'sfootprints altered their character from the time that hepassed the moor-gate, and that he appeared from thenceonward to have been walking upon his toes. OneMurphy, a gipsy horse-dealer, was on the moor at no greatdistance at the time, but he appears by his own confessionto have been the worse for drink. He declares that heheard cries, but is unable to state from what direction theycame. No signs of violence were to be discovered uponSir Charles's person, and though the doctor's evidencepointed to an almost incredible facial distortion--so greatthat Dr. Mortimer refused at first to believe that it wasindeed his friend and patient who lay before him--it wasexplained that that is a symptom which is not unusual incases of dyspnoea and death from cardiac exhaustion. Thisexplanation was  borne   out by  the post-mortemexamination, which showed long-standing organic disease,and the coroner's jury returned a verdict in accordancewith the medical evidence. It is well that this is so, for it isobviously of the utmost importance that Sir Charles's heirshould settle at the Hall and continue the good workwhich has been so sadly interrupted. Had the prosaicfinding of the coroner not finally put an end to theromantic stories which have been whispered in connectionwith the affair, it might have been difficult to find a tenantfor Baskerville Hall. It is understood that the next of kin isMr. Henry Baskerville, if he be still alive, the son of SirCharles Baskerville's younger brother. The young manwhen last heard of was in America, and inquiries are beinginstituted with a view to informing him of his goodfortune.' Dr. Mortimer refolded his paper and replaced it in hispocket. `Those are the public facts, Mr. Holmes, in connectionwith the death of Sir Charles Baskerville.' `I must thank you,' said Sherlock Holmes, `for callingmy attention to a case which certainly presents somefeatures of interest. I had observed some newspapercomment at the time, but I was exceedingly preoccupiedby that little affair of the Vatican cameos, and in myanxiety to oblige the Pope I lost touch with severalinteresting English cases. This article, you say, contains allthe public facts?' `It does.' `Then let me have the private ones.' He leaned back,put his finger-tips together, and assumed his mostimpassive and judicial expression. `In doing so,' said Dr. Mortimer, who had begun toshow signs of some strong emotion, `I am telling thatwhich I have not confided to anyone. My motive forwithholding it from the coroner's inquiry is that a man ofscience shrinks from placing himself in the public positionof seeming to indorse a popular superstition. I had thefurther motive that Baskerville Hall, as the paper says,would certainly remain untenanted if anything were doneto increase its already rather grim reputation. For boththese reasons I thought that I was justified in telling ratherless than I knew, since no practical good could result fromit, but with you there is no reason why I should not beperfectly frank. `The moor is very sparsely inhabited, and those wholive near each other are thrown very much together. Forthis reason I saw a good deal of Sir Charles Baskerville.With the exception of Mr. Frankland, of Lafter Hall, andMr. Stapleton, the naturalist, there are no other men ofeducation within many miles. Sir Charles was a retiringman, but the chance of his illness brought us together, anda community of interests in science kept us so. He hadbrought back much scientific information from SouthAfrica, and many a charming evening we have spenttogether discussing the comparative anatomy of theBushman and the Hottentot. `Within the last few months it became increasinglyplain to me that Sir Charles's nervous system was strainedto the breaking point. He had taken this legend which Ihave read you exceedingly to heart--so much so that,although he would walk in his own grounds, nothingwould induce him to go out upon the moor at night.Incredible as it may appear to you, Mr. Holmes, he washonestly convinced that a dreadful fate overhung hisfamily, and certainly the records which he was able to giveof his ancestors were not encouraging. The idea of someghastly presence constantly haunted him, and on morethan one occasion he has asked me whether I had on mymedical journeys at night ever seen any strange creature orheard the baying of a hound. The latter question he put tome several times, and always with a voice which vibratedwith excitement. `I can well remember driving up to his house in theevening some three weeks before the fatal event. Hechanced to be at his hall door. I had descended from mygig and was standing in front of him, when I saw his eyesfix themselves over my shoulder, and stare past me with anexpression of the most dreadful horror. I whisked roundand had just time to catch a glimpse of something which Itook to be a large black calf passing at the head of thedrive. So excited and alarmed was he that I was compelledto go down to the spot where the animal had been andlook around for it. It was gone, however, and the incidentappeared to make the worst impression upon his mind. Istayed with him all the evening, and it was on thatoccasion, to explain the emotion which he had shown,that he confided to my keeping that narrative which I readto you when first I came. I mention this small episodebecause it assumes some importance in view of the tragedywhich followed, but I was convinced at the time that thematter was entirely trivial and that his excitement had nojustification. `It was at my advice that Sir Charles was about to go toLondon. His heart was, I knew, affected, and the constantanxiety in which he lived, however chimerical the causeof it might be, was evidently having a serious effect uponhis health. I thought that a few months among thedistractions of town would send him back a new man. Mr.Stapleton, a mutual friend who was much concerned at hisstate of health, was of the same opinion. At the last instantcame this terrible catastrophe. `On the night of Sir Charles's death Barrymore thebutler, who made the discovery, sent Perkins the groomon horseback to me, and as I was sitting up late I was ableto reach Baskerville Hall within an hour of the event. Ichecked and corroborated all the facts which werementioned at the inquest. I followed the footsteps downthe Yew Alley, I saw the spot at the moor-gate where heseemed to have waited, I remarked the change in theshape of the prints after that point, I noted that there wereno other footsteps save those of Barrymore on the softgravel, and finally I carefully examined the body, whichhad not been touched until my arrival. Sir Charles lay onhis face, his arms out, his fingers dug into the ground, andhis features convulsed with some strong emotion to suchan extent that I could hardly have sworn to his identity.There was certainly no physical injury of any kind. Butone false statement was made by Barrymore at the inquest.He said that there were no traces upon the ground roundthe body. He did not observe any. But I did--some littledistance off, but fresh and clear.' `Footprints?' `Footprints.' `A man's or a woman's?' Dr. Mortimer looked strangely at us for an instant, andhis voice sank almost to a whisper as he answered:-- `Mr. Holmes, they were the footprints of a gigantichound!'         
        The Problem  I confess at these words a shudder passed through me.There was a thrill in the doctor's voice which showed thathe was himself deeply moved by that which he told us.Holmes leaned forward in his excitement and his eyes hadthe hard, dry glitter which shot from them when he waskeenly interested.  `You saw this?'  `As clearly as I see you.'  `And you said nothing?'  `What was the use?'  `How was it that no one else saw it?'  `The marks were some twenty yards from the body andno one gave them a thought. I don't suppose I shouldhave done so had I not known this legend.'  `There are many sheep-dogs on the moor?'  `No doubt, but this was no sheep-dog.'  `You say it was large?'  `Enormous.'  `But it had not approached the body?'  `No.' `What sort of night was it?' `Damp and raw.' `But not actually raining?' `No.' `What is the Alley like?' `There are two lines of old yew hedge, twelve feet highand impenetrable. The walk in the centre is about eightfeet across.' `Is there anything between the hedges and the walk?' `Yes, there is a strip of grass about six feet broad oneither side.' `I understand that the yew hedge is penetrated at onepoint by a gate?' `Yes, the wicket-gate which leads on to the moor.' `Is there any other opening?' `None.' `So that to reach the Yew Alley one either has to comedown it from the house or else to enter it by the moor-gate?' `There is an exit through a summer-house at the farend.' `Had Sir Charles reached this?' `No; he lay about fifty yards from it.' `Now, tell me, Dr. Mortimer--and this is important--the marks which you saw were on the path and not on thegrass?' `No marks could show on the grass.' `Were they on the same side of the path as the moor-gate?' `Yes; they were on the edge of the path on the sameside as the moor-gate.' `You interest me exceedingly. Another point. Was thewicket-gate closed?' `Closed and padlocked.' `How high was it?' `About four feet high.' `Then anyone could have got over it?' `Yes.' `And what marks did you see by the wicket-gate?' `None in particular.' `Good heaven! Did no one examine?' `Yes, I examined myself.' `And found nothing?' `It was all very confused. Sir Charles had evidentlystood there for five or ten minutes.' `How do you know that?' `Because the ash had twice dropped from his cigar.' `Excellent! This is a colleague, Watson, after our ownheart. But the marks?' `He had left his own marks all over that small patch ofgravel. I could discern no others.' Sherlock Holmes struck his hand against his knee withan impatient gesture. `If I had only been there!' he cried. `It is evidently acase of extraordinary interest, and one which presentedimmense opportunities to the scientific expert. That gravelpage upon which I might have read so much has beenlong ere this smudged by the rain and defaced by the clogsof curious peasants. Oh, Dr. Mortimer, Dr. Mortimer, tothink that you should not have called me in! You haveindeed much to answer for.' `I could not call you in, Mr. Holmes, withoutdisclosing these facts to the world, and I have alreadygiven my reasons for not wishing to do so. Besides, besides--` `Why do you hesitate?' `There is a realm in which the most acute and mostexperienced of detectives is helpless.' `You mean that the thing is supernatural?' `I did not positively say so.' `No, but you evidently think it.' `Since the tragedy, Mr. Holmes, there have come tomy ears several incidents which are hard to reconcile withthe settled order of Nature.' `For example?' `I find that before the terrible event occurred severalpeople had seen a creature upon the moor whichcorresponds with this Baskerville demon, and which couldnot possibly be any animal known to science. They allagreed that it was a huge creature, luminous, ghastly, andspectral. I have cross-examined these men, one of them ahard-headed countryman, one a farrier, and one amoorland farmer, who all tell the same story of thisdreadful apparition, exactly corresponding to the hell-hound of the legend. I assure you that there is a reign ofterror in the district, and that it is a hardy man who willcross the moor at night.' `And you, a trained man of science, believe it to besupernatural?' `I do not know what to believe.' Holmes shrugged his shoulders. `I have hitherto confined my investigations to thisworld,' said he. `In a modest way I have combated evil,but to take on the Father of Evil himself would, perhaps,be too ambitious a task. Yet you must admit that thefootmark is material.' `The original hound was material enough to tug aman's throat out, and yet he was diabolical as well.' `I see that you have quite gone over to thesupernaturalists. But now, Dr. Mortimer, tell me this. Ifyou hold these views, why have you come to consult meat all? You tell me in the same breath that it is useless toinvestigate Sir Charles's death, and that you desire me todo it.' `I did not say that I desired you to do it.' `Then, how can I assist you?' `By advising me as to what I should do with Sir HenryBaskerville, who arrives at Waterloo Station'--Dr.Mortimer looked at his watch--`in exactly one hour and aquarter.' `He being the heir?' `Yes. On the death of Sir Charles we inquired for thisyoung gentleman and found that he had been farming inCanada. From the accounts which have reached us he isan excellent fellow in every way. I speak not as a medicalman but as a trustee and executor of Sir Charles's will.' `There is no other claimant, I presume?' `None. The only other kinsman whom we have beenable to trace was Rodger Baskerville, the youngest of threebrothers of whom poor Sir Charles was the elder. Thesecond brother, who died young, is the father of this ladHenry. The third, Rodger, was the black sheep of thefamily. He came of the old masterful Baskerville strain,and was the very image, they tell me, of the family pictureof old Hugo. He made England too hot to hold him, fledto Central America, and died there in 1876 of yellowfever. Henry is the last of the Baskervilles. In one hour andfive minutes I meet him at Waterloo Station. I have had awire that he arrived at Southampton this morning. Now,Mr. Holmes, what would you advise me to do with him?' `Why should he not go to the home of his fathers?' `It seems natural, does it not? And yet, consider thatevery Baskerville who goes there meets with an evil fate. Ifeel sure that if Sir Charles could have spoken with mebefore his death he would have warned me againstbringing this, the last of the old race, and the heir to greatwealth, to that deadly place. And yet it cannot be deniedthat the prosperity of the whole poor, bleak country-sidedepends upon his presence. All the good work which hasbeen done by Sir Charles will crash to the ground if thereis no tenant of the Hall. I fear lest I should be swayed toomuch by my own obvious interest in the matter, and thatis why I bring the case before you and ask for youradvice.' Holmes considered for a little time. `Put into plain words, the matter is this,' said he. `Inyour opinion there is a diabolical agency which makesDartmoor an unsafe abode for a Baskerville--that is youropinion?' `At least I might go the length of saying that there issome evidence that this may be so.' `Exactly. But surely, if your supernatural theory becorrect, it could work the young man evil in London aseasily as in Devonshire. A devil with merely local powerslike a parish vestry would be too inconceivable a thing.' `You put the matter more flippantly, Mr. Holmes, thanyou would probably do if you were brought into personalcontact with these things. Your advice, then, as Iunderstand it, is that the young man will be as safe inDevonshire as in London. He comes in fifty minutes.What would you recommend?' `I recommend, sir, that you take a cab, call off yourspaniel who is scratching at my front door, and proceed toWaterloo to meet Sir Henry Baskerville.' `And then?' `And then you will say nothing to him at all until Ihave made up my mind about the matter.' `How long will it take you to make up your mind?' `Twenty-four hours. At ten o'clock to-morrow, Dr.Mortimer, I will be much obliged to you if you will callupon me here, and it will be of help to me in my plans forthe future if you will bring Sir Henry Baskerville withyou.' `I will do so, Mr. Holmes.' He scribbled theappointment on his shirtcuff and hurried off in his strange,peering, absent-minded fashion. Holmes stopped him atthe head of the stair. `Only one more question, Dr. Mortimer. You say thatbefore Sir Charles Baskerville's death several people sawthis apparition upon the moor?' `Three people did.' `Did any see it after?' `I have not heard of any.' `Thank you. Good morning.' Holmes returned to his seat with that quiet look ofinward satisfaction which meant that he had a congenialtask before him. `Going out, Watson?' `Unless I can help you.' `No, my dear fellow, it is at the hour of action that Iturn to you for aid. But this is splendid, really unique fromsome points of view. When you pass Bradley's, would youask him to send up a pound of the strongest shag tobacco?Thank you. It would be as well if you could make itconvenient not to return before evening. Then I shouldbe very glad to compare impressions as to this mostinteresting problem which has been submitted to us thismorning.' I knew that seclusion and solitude were very necessaryfor my friend in those hours of intense mentalconcentration during which he weighed every particle ofevidence, constructed alternative theories, balanced oneagainst the other, and made up his mind as to whichpoints were essential and which immaterial. I thereforespent the day at my club and did not return to BakerStreet until evening. It was nearly nine o'clock when Ifound myself in the sitting-room once more. My first impression as I opened the door was that a firehad broken out, for the room was so filled with smokethat the light of the lamp upon the table was blurred by it.As I entered, however, my fears were set at rest, for it wasthe acrid fumes of strong coarse tobacco which took meby the throat and set me coughing. Through the haze Ihad a vague vision of Holmes in his dressing-gown coiledup in an armchair with his black clay pipe between hislips. Several rolls of paper lay around him.  `Caught cold, Watson?' said he.  `No, it's this poisonous atmosphere.'  `I suppose it is pretty thick, now that you mention it.'  `Thick! It is intolerable.'  `Open the window, then! You have been at your cluball day, I perceive.'  `My dear Holmes!'  `Am I right?'  `Certainly, but how?'  He laughed at my bewildered expression.  `There is a delightful freshness about you, Watson,which makes it a pleasure to exercise any small powerswhich I possess at your expense. A gentleman goes forthon a showery and miry day. He returns immaculate in theevening with the gloss still on his hat and his boots. He hasbeen a fixture therefore all day. He is not a man withintimate friends. Where, then, could he have been? Is itnot obvious?'  `Well, it is rather obvious.' `The world is full of obvious things which nobody byany chance ever observes. Where do you think that I havebeen?' `A fixture also.' `On the contrary, I have been to Devonshire.' `In spirit?' `Exactly. My body has remained in this arm-chair andhas, I regret to observe, consumed in my absence twolarge pots of coffee and an incredible amount of tobacco.After you left I sent down to Stamford's for the Ordnancemap of this portion of the moor, and my spirit hashovered over it all day. I flatter myself that I could find myway about.' `A large scale map, I presume?' `Very large.' He unrolled one section and held it overhis knee. `Here you have the particular district whichconcerns us. That is Baskerville Hall in the middle.' `With a wood round it?' `Exactly. I fancy the Yew Alley, though not markedunder that name, must stretch along this line, with themoor, as you perceive, upon the right of it. This smallclump of buildings here is the hamlet of Grimpen, whereour friend Dr. Mortimer has his headquarters. Within aradius of five miles there are, as you see, only a very fewscattered dwellings. Here is Lafter Hall, which wasmentioned in the narrative. There is a house indicatedhere which may be the residence of the naturalist--Stapleton, if I remember right, was his name. Here aretwo moorland farm-houses, High Tor and Foulmire.Then fourteen miles away the great convict prison ofPrincetown. Between and around these scattered pointsextends the desolate, lifeless moor. This, then, is the stageupon which tragedy has been played, and upon which wemay help to play it again.' `It must be a wild place.' `Yes, the setting is a worthy one. If the devil did desireto have a hand in the affairs of men ----` `Then you are yourself inclining to the supernaturalexplanation.' `The devil's agents may be of flesh and blood, may theynot? There are two questions waiting for us at the outset.The one is whether any crime has been committed at all;the second is, what is the crime and how was itcommitted? Of course, if Dr. Mortimer's surmise shouldbe correct, and we are dealing with forces outside theordinary laws of Nature, there is an end of ourinvestigation. But we are bound to exhaust all otherhypotheses before falling back upon this one. I think we'llshut that window again, if you don't mind. It is a singularthing, but I find that a concentrated atmosphere helps aconcentration of thought. I have not pushed it to thelength of getting into a box to think, but that is the logicaloutcome of my convictions. Have you turned the caseover in your mind?'  `Yes, I have thought a good deal of it in the course ofthe day.'  `What do you make of it?'  `It is very bewildering.'  `It has certainly a character of its own. There are pointsof distinction about it. That change in the footprints, forexample. What do you make of that?'  `Mortimer said that the man had walked on tiptoedown that portion of the alley.'  `He only repeated what some fool had said at theinquest. Why should a man walk on tiptoe down thealley?'  `What then?'  `He   was running, Watson--running  desperately,running for his life, running until he burst his heart andfell dead upon his face.'  `Running from what?' `There lies our problem. There are indications that theman was crazed with fear before ever he began to run.' `How can you say that?' `I am presuming that the cause of his fears came to himacross the moor. If that were so, and it seems mostprobable, only a man who had lost his wits would haverun from the house instead of towards it. If the gipsy'sevidence may be taken as true, he ran with cries for helpin the direction where help was least likely to be. Then,again, whom was he waiting for that night, and why washe waiting for him in the Yew Alley rather than in hisown house?' `You think that he was waiting for someone?' `The man was elderly and infirm. We can understandhis taking an evening stroll, but the ground was damp andthe night inclement. Is it natural that he should stand forfive or ten minutes, as Dr. Mortimer, with more practicalsense than I should have given him credit for, deducedfrom the cigar ash?' `But he went out every evening.' `I think it unlikely that he waited at the moor-gateevery evening. On the contrary, the evidence is that heavoided the moor. That night he waited there. It was thenight before he made his departure for London. The thingtakes shape, Watson. It becomes coherent. Might I askyou to hand me my violin, and we will postpone allfurther thought upon this business until we have had theadvantage of meeting Dr. Mortimer and Sir HenryBaskerville in the morning.'         
       Sir Henry Baskerville Our breakfast-table was cleared early, and Holmeswaited in his dressing-gown for the promised interview.Our clients were punctual to their appointment, for theclock had just struck ten when Dr. Mortimer was shownup, followed by the young baronet. The latter was a small,alert, dark-eyed man about thirty years of age, verysturdily built, with thick black eyebrows and a strong,pugnacious face. He wore a ruddy-tinted tweed suit andhad the weather-beaten appearance of one who has spentmost of his time in the open air, and yet there wassomething in his steady eye and the quiet assurance of hisbearing which indicated the gentleman. `This is Sir Henry Baskerville,' said Dr. Mortimer. `Why, yes,' said he, `and the strange thing is, Mr.Sherlock Holmes, that if my friend here had not proposedcoming round to you this morning I should have come onmy own account. I understand that you think out littlepuzzles, and I've had one this morning which wants morethinking out than I am able to give it.' `Pray take a seat, Sir Henry. Do I understand you to saythat you have yourself had some remarkable experiencesince you arrived in London?' `Nothing of much importance, Mr. Holmes. Only ajoke, as like as not. It was this letter, if you can call it aletter, which reached me this morning.' He laid an envelope upon the table, and we all bentover it. It was of common quality, grayish in colour. Theaddress, `Sir Henry Baskerville, Northumberland Hotel,'was printed in rough characters; the postmark `CharingCross,' and the date of posting the preceding evening. `Who   knew  that you   were going to  theNorthumberland Hotel?' asked Holmes, glancing keenlyacross at our visitor. `No one could have known. We only decided after Imet Dr. Mortimer.' `But Dr. Mortimer was no doubt already stoppingthere?' `No, I had been staying with a friend,' said the doctor.`There was no possible indication that we intended to goto this hotel.' `Hum! Someone seems to be very deeply interested inyour movements.' Out of the envelope he took a half-sheet of foolscap paper folded into four. This he openedand spread flat upon the table. Across the middle of it asingle sentence had been formed by the expedient ofpasting printed words upon it. It ran: `As you value yourlife or your reason keep away from the moor.' The word`moor' only was printed in ink. `Now,' said Sir Henry Baskerville, `perhaps you will tellme, Mr. Holmes, what in thunder is the meaning of that,and who it is that takes so much interest in my affairs?' `What do you make of it, Dr. Mortimer? You mustallow that there is nothing supernatural about this, at anyrate?' `No, sir, but it might very well come from someonewho was convinced that the business is supernatural.' `What business?' asked Sir Henry sharply. `It seems tome that all you gentlemen know a great deal more than Ido about my own affairs.' `You shall share our knowledge before you leave thisroom, Sir Henry. I promise you that,' said SherlockHolmes. `We will confine ourselves for the present withyour permission to this very interesting document, whichmust have been put together and posted yesterdayevening. Have you yesterday's Times, Watson?' `It is here in the corner.' `Might I trouble you for it--the inside page, please,with the leading articles?' He glanced swiftly over it,running his eyes up and down the columns. `Capital articlethis on free trade. Permit me to give you an extract fromit. `You may be cajoled into imagining that your ownspecial trade or your own industry will be encouraged by aprotective tariff, but it stands to reason that such legislationmust in the long run keep away wealth from the country,diminish the value of our imports, and lower the generalconditions of life in this island.' What do you think ofthat, Watson?' cried Holmes in high glee, rubbing hishands together with satisfaction. `Don't you think that isan admirable sentiment?' Dr. Mortimer looked at Holmes with an air ofprofessional interest, and Sir Henry Baskerville turned apair of puzzled dark eyes upon me. `I don't know much about the tariff and things of thatkind,' said he; `but it seems to me we've got a bit off thetrail so far as that note is concerned.' `On the contrary, I think we are particularly hot uponthe trail, Sir Henry. Watson here knows more about mymethods than you do, but I fear that even he has not quitegrasped the significance of this sentence.' `No, I confess that I see no connection.' `And yet, my dear Watson, there is so very close aconnection that the one is extracted out of the other.`You,' `your,' `your,' `life,' `reason,' `value,' `keep away,'`from the.' Don't you see now whence these words havebeen taken?' `By thunder, you're right! Well, if that isn't smart!'cried Sir Henry. `If any possible doubt remained it is settled by the factthat `keep away' and `from the' are cut out in one piece.' `Well, now--so it is!' `Really, Mr. Holmes, this exceeds anything which Icould have imagined,' said Dr. Mortimer, gazing at myfriend in amazement. `I could understand anyone sayingthat the words were from a newspaper; but that youshould name which, and add that it came from the leadingarticle, is really one of the most remarkable things which Ihave ever known. How did you do it?' `I presume, Doctor, that you could tell the skull of anegro from that of an Esquimau?' `Most certainly.' `But how?' `Because that is my special hobby. The differences areobvious. The supra-orbital crest, the facial angle, themaxillary curve, the --` `But this is my special hobby, and the differences areequally obvious. There is as much difference to my eyesbetween the leaded bourgeois type of a Times article andthe slovenly print of an evening half-penny paper as therecould be between your negro and your Esquimau. Thedetection of types is one of the most elementary branchesof knowledge to the special expert in crime, though Iconfess that once when I was very young I confused theLeeds Mercury with the Western Morning News. But aTimes leader is entirely distinctive, and these words couldhave been taken from nothing else. As it was doneyesterday the strong probability was that we should findthe words in yesterday's issue.' `So far as I can follow you, then, Mr. Holmes,' said SirHenry Baskerville, `someone cut out this message with ascissors--` `Nail-scissors,' said Holmes. `You can see that it was avery short-bladed scissors, since the cutter had to take twosnips over `keep away.'' `That is so. Someone, then, cut out the message with apair of short-bladed scissors, pasted it with paste--` `Gum,' said Holmes. `With gum on to the paper. But I want to know whythe word `moor' should have been written?' `Because he could not find it in print. The other wordswere all simple and might be found in any issue, but`moor' would be less common.' `Why, of course, that would explain it. Have you readanything else in this message, Mr. Holmes?' `There are one or two indications, and yet the utmostpains have been taken to remove all clues. The address,you observe is printed in rough characters. But the Timesis a paper which is seldom found in any hands but those ofthe highly educated. We may take it, therefore, that theletter was composed by an educated man who wished topose as an uneducated one, and his effort to conceal hisown writing suggests that that writing might be known, orcome to be known, by you. Again, you will observe thatthe words are not gummed on in an accurate line, but thatsome are much higher than others. `Life,' for example isquite out of its proper place. That may point tocarelessness or it may point to agitation and hurry uponthe part of the cutter. On the whole I incline to the latterview, since the matter was evidently important, and it isunlikely that the composer of such a letter would becareless. If he were in a hurry it opens up the interestingquestion why he should be in a hurry, since any letterposted up to early morning would reach Sir Henry beforehe would leave his hotel. Did the composer fear aninterruption--and from whom?' `We are coming now rather into the region ofguesswork,' said Dr. Mortimer. `Say, rather, into the region where we balanceprobabilities and choose the most likely. It is the scientificuse of the imagination, but we have always some materialbasis on which to start our speculation. Now, you wouldcall it a guess, no doubt, but I am almost certain that thisaddress has been written in a hotel.' `How in the world can you say that?' `If you examine it carefully you will see that both thepen and the ink have given the writer trouble. The penhas spluttered twice in a single word, and has run dry threetimes in a short address, showing that there was very littleink in the bottle. Now, a private pen or ink-bottle isseldom allowed to be in such a state, and the combinationof the two must be quite rare. But you know the hotel inkand the hotel pen, where it is rare to get anything else.Yes, I have very little hesitation in saying that could weexamine the waste-paper baskets of the hotels aroundCharing Cross until we found the remains of the mutilatedTimes leader we could lay our hands straight upon theperson who sent this singular message. Halloa! Halloa!What's this?' He was carefully examining the foolscap, upon whichthe words were pasted, holding it only an inch or twofrom his eyes. `Well?' `Nothing,' said he, throwing it down. `It is a blankhalf-sheet of paper, without even a water-mark upon it. Ithink we have drawn as much as we can from this curiousletter; and now, Sir Henry, has anything else of interesthappened to you since you have been in London?' `Why, no, Mr. Holmes. I think not.' `You have not observed anyone follow or watch you?' `I seem to have walked right into the thick of a dimenovel,' said our visitor. `Why in thunder should anyonefollow or watch me?' `We are coming to that. You have nothing else toreport to us before we go into this matter?' `Well, it depends upon what you think worthreporting.' `I think anything out of the ordinary routine of life wellworth reporting.' Sir Henry smiled. `I don't know much of British life yet, for I have spentnearly all my time in the States and in Canada. But I hopethat to lose one of your boots is not part of the ordinaryroutine of life over here.' `You have lost one of your boots?' `My dear sir,' cried Dr. Mortimer, `it is only mislaid.You will find it when you return to the hotel. What is theuse of troubling Mr. Holmes with trifles of this kind?' `Well, he asked me for anything outside the ordinaryroutine.' `Exactly,' said Holmes, `however foolish the incidentmay seem. You have lost one of your boots, you say?' `Well, mislaid it, anyhow. I put them both outside mydoor last night, and there was only one in the morning. Icould get no sense out of the chap who cleans them. Theworst of it is that I only bought the pair last night in theStrand, and I have never had them on.' `If you have never worn them, why did you put themout to be cleaned?' `They were tan boots and had never been varnished.That was why I put them out.' `Then I understand that on your arrival in Londonyesterday you went out at once and bought a pair ofboots?'  `I did a good deal of shopping. Dr. Mortimer herewent round with me. You see, if I am to be squire downthere I must dress the part, and it may be that I have got alittle careless in my ways out West. Among other things Ibought these brown boots--gave six dollars for them--and had one stolen before ever I had them on my feet.'  `It seems a singularly useless thing to steal,' saidSherlock Holmes. `I confess that I share Dr. Mortimer'sbelief that it will not be long before the missing boot isfound.'  `And, now, gentlemen,' said the baronet with decision,`it seems to me that I have spoken quite enough about thelittle that I know. It is time that you kept your promiseand gave me a full account of what we are all driving at.'  `Your request is a very reasonable one,' Holmesanswered. `Dr. Mortimer, I think you could not do betterthan to tell your story as you told it to us.'  Thus encouraged, our scientific friend drew his papersfrom his pocket, and presented the whole case as he haddone upon the morning before. Sir Henry Baskervillelistened with the deepest attention, and with an occasionalexclamation of surprise.  `Well, I seem to have come into an inheritance with avengeance,' said he when the long narrative was finished.`Of course, I've heard of the hound ever since I was in thenursery. It's the pet story of the family, though I neverthought of taking it seriously before. But as to my uncle'sdeath--well, it all seems boiling up in my head, and Ican't get it clear yet. You don't seem quite to have madeup your mind whether it's a case for a policeman or aclergyman.' `Precisely.' `And now there's this affair of the letter to me at thehotel. I suppose that fits into its place.' `It seems to show that someone knows more than wedo about what goes on upon the moor,' said Dr.Mortimer. `And also,' said Holmes, `that someone is not ill-disposed towards you, since they warn you of danger.' `Or it may be that they wish, for their own purposes, toscare me away.' `Well, of course, that is possible also. I am very muchindebted to you, Dr. Mortimer, for introducing me to aproblem which presents several interesting alternatives.But the practical point which we now have to decide, SirHenry, is whether it is or is not advisable for you to go toBaskerville Hall.' `Why should I not go?' `There seems to be danger.' `Do you mean danger from this family fiend or do youmean danger from human beings?' `Well, that is what we have to find out.' `Whichever it is, my answer is fixed. There is no devilin hell, Mr. Holmes, and there is no man upon earth whocan prevent me from going to the home of my ownpeople, and you may take that to be my final answer.' Hisdark brows knitted and his face flushed to a dusky red ashe spoke. It was evident that the fiery temper of theBaskervilles was not extinct in this their last representative.`Meanwhile,' said he, `I have hardly had time to thinkover all that you have told me. It's a big thing for a man tohave to understand and to decide at one sitting. I shouldlike to have a quiet hour by myself to make up my mind.Now, look here, Mr. Holmes, it's half-past eleven nowand I am going back right away to my hotel. Suppose youand your friend, Dr. Watson, come round and lunch withus at two. I'll be able to tell you more clearly then howthis thing strikes me.' `Is that convenient to you, Watson?' `Perfectly.' `Then you may expect us. Shall I have a cab called?' `I'd prefer to walk, for this affair has flurried me rather.' `I'll join you in a walk, with pleasure,' said hiscompanion. `Then we meet again at two o'clock. Au revoir, andgood-morning!' We heard the steps of our visitors descend the stair andthe bang of the front door. In an instant Holmes hadchanged from the languid dreamer to the man of action. `Your hat and boots, Watson, quick! Not a moment tolose!' He rushed into his room in his dressing-gown andwas back again in a few seconds in a frock-coat. Wehurried together down the stairs and into the street. Dr.Mortimer and Baskerville were still visible about twohundred yards ahead of us in the direction of OxfordStreet. `Shall I run on and stop them?' `Not for the world, my dear Watson. I am perfectlysatisfied with your company if you will tolerate mine. Ourfriends are wise, for it is certainly a very fine morning for awalk.' He quickened his pace until we had decreased thedistance which divided us by about half. Then, stillkeeping a hundred yards behind, we followed into OxfordStreet and so down Regent Street. Once our friendsstopped and stared into a shop window, upon whichHolmes did the same. An instant afterwards he gave a littlecry of satisfaction, and, following the direction of his eagereyes, I saw that a hansom cab with a man inside which hadhalted on the other side of the street was now proceedingslowly onward again. `There's our man, Watson! Come along! We'll have agood look at him, if we can do no more.' At that instant I was aware of a bushy black beard and apair of piercing eyes turned upon us through the sidewindow of the cab. Instantly the trapdoor at the top flewup, something was screamed to the driver, and the cabflew madly off down Regent Street. Holmes lookedeagerly round for another, but no empty one was in sight.Then he dashed in wild pursuit amid the stream of thetraffic, but the start was too great, and already the cab wasout of sight. `There now!' said Holmes bitterly as he emergedpanting and white with vexation from the tide of vehicles.`Was ever such bad luck and such bad management, too?Watson, Watson, if you are an honest man you will recordthis also and set it against my successes!' `Who was the man?' `I have not an idea.' `A spy?'  `Well, it was evident from what we have heard thatBaskerville has been very closely shadowed by someonesince he has been in town. How else could it be known soquickly that it was the Northumberland Hotel which hehad chosen? If they had followed him the first day Iargued that they would follow him also the second. Youmay have observed that I twice strolled over to thewindow while Dr. Mortimer was reading his legend.'  `Yes, I remember.'  `I was looking out for loiterers in the street, but I sawnone. We are dealing with a clever man, Watson. Thismatter cuts very deep, and though I have not finally madeup my mind whether it is a benevolent or a malevolentagency which is in touch with us, I am conscious alwaysof power and design. When our friends left I at oncefollowed them in the hopes of marking down theirinvisible attendant. So wily was he that he had not trustedhimself upon foot, but he had availed himself of a cab sothat he could loiter behind or dash past them and so escapetheir notice. His method had the additional advantage thatif they were to take a cab he was all ready to follow them.It has, however, one obvious disadvantage.'  `It puts him in the power of the cabman.'  `Exactly.' `What a pity we did not get the number!' `My dear Watson, clumsy as I have been, you surely donot seriously imagine that I neglected to get the number?No. 2704 is our man. But that is no use to us for themoment.' `I fail to see how you could have done more.' `On observing the cab I should have instantly turnedand walked in the other direction. I should then at myleisure have hired a second cab and followed the first at arespectful distance, or, better still, have driven to theNorthumberland Hotel and waited there. When ourunknown had followed Baskerville home we should havehad the opportunity of playing his own game upon himselfand seeing where he made for. As it is, by an indiscreeteagerness,   which was   taken  advantage  of  withextraordinary quickness and energy by our opponent, wehave betrayed ourselves and lost our man.' We had been sauntering slowly down Regent Streetduring this conversation, and Dr. Mortimer, with hiscompanion, had long vanished in front of us. `There is no object in our following them,' saidHolmes. `The shadow has departed and will not return.We must see what further cards we have in our hands andplay them with decision. Could you swear to that man'sface within the cab?' `I could swear only to the beard.' `And so could I--from which I gather that in allprobability it was a false one. A clever man upon sodelicate an errand has no use for a beard save to concealhis features. Come in here, Watson!' He turned into one of the district messenger offices,where he was warmly greeted by the manager. `Ah, Wilson, I see you have not forgotten the little casein which I had the good fortune to help you?' `No, sir, indeed I have not. You saved my good name,and perhaps my life.' `My dear fellow, you exaggerate. I have somerecollection, Wilson, that you had among your boys a ladnamed Cartwright, who showed some ability during theinvestigation.' `Yes, sir, he is still with us.' `Could you ring him up?--thank you! And I should beglad to have change of this five-pound note.' A lad of fourteen, with a bright, keen face, had obeyedthe summons of the manager. He stood now gazing withgreat reverence at the famous detective. `Let me have the Hotel Directory,' said Holmes.`Thank you! Now, Cartwright, there are the names oftwenty-three   hotels   here,  all in  the immediateneighbourhood of Charing Cross. Do you see?' `Yes, sir.' `You will visit each of these in turn.' `Yes, sir.' `You will begin in each case by giving the outsideporter one shilling. Here are twenty-three shillings.' `Yes, sir.' `You will tell him that you want to see the waste-paperof yesterday. You will say that an important telegram hasmiscarried and that you are looking for it. Youunderstand?' `Yes, sir.' `But what you are really looking for is the centre pageof the Times with some holes cut in it with scissors. Hereis a copy of the Times. It is this page. You could easilyrecognize it, could you not?' `Yes, sir.' `In each case the outside porter will send for the hallporter, to whom also you will give a shilling. Here aretwenty-three shillings. You will then learn in possiblytwenty cases out of the twenty-three that the waste of theday before has been burned or removed. In the threeother cases you will be shown a heap of paper and youwill look for this page of the Times among it. The oddsare enormously against your finding it. There are tenshillings over in case of emergencies. Let me have a reportby wire at Baker Street before evening. And now,Watson, it only remains for us to find out by wire theidentity of the cabman, No. 2704, and then we will dropinto one of the Bond Street picture galleries and fill in thetime until we are due at the hotel.'         
      Three Broken Threads Sherlock Holmes had, in a very remarkable degree, thepower of detaching his mind at will. For two hours thestrange business in which we had been involved appearedto be forgotten, and he was entirely absorbed in thepictures of the modern Belgian masters. He would talk ofnothing but art, of which he had the crudest ideas, fromour leaving the gallery until we found ourselves at theNorthumberland Hotel. `Sir Henry Baskerville is upstairs expecting you,' saidthe clerk. `He asked me to show you up at once when youcame.' `Have you any objection to my looking at yourregister?' said Holmes. `Not in the least.' The book showed that two names had been added afterthat of Baskerville. One was Theophilus Johnson andfamily, of Newcastle; the other Mrs. Oldmore and maid,of High Lodge, Alton. `Surely that must be the same Johnson whom I used toknow,' said Holmes to the porter. `A lawyer, is he not,gray-headed, and walks with a limp?' `No, sir; this is Mr. Johnson, the coal-owner, a veryactive gentleman, not older than yourself.' `Surely you are mistaken about his trade?' `No, sir! he has used this hotel for many years, and he isvery well known to us.' `Ah, that settles it. Mrs. Oldmore, too; I seem toremember the name. Excuse my curiosity, but often incalling upon one friend one finds another.' `She is an invalid lady, sir. Her husband was oncemayor of Gloucester. She always comes to us when she isin town.' `Thank you; I am afraid I cannot claim heracquaintance. We have established a most important factby these questions, Watson,' he continued in a low voiceas we went upstairs together. `We know now that thepeople who are so interested in our friend have not settleddown in his own hotel. That means that while they are, aswe have seen, very anxious to watch him, they are equallyanxious that he should not see them. Now, this is a mostsuggestive fact.' `What does it suggest?' `It suggests--halloa, my dear fellow, what on earth isthe matter?' As we came round the top of the stairs we had run upagainst Sir Henry Baskerville himself. His face was flushedwith anger, and he held an old and dusty boot in one ofhis hands. So furious was he that he was hardly articulate,and when he did speak it was in a much broader and moreWestern dialect than any which we had heard from him inthe morning. `Seems to me they are playing me for a sucker in thishotel,' he cried. `They'll find they've started in to monkeywith the wrong man unless they are careful. By thunder, ifthat chap can't find my missing boot there will be trouble.I can take a joke with the best, Mr. Holmes, but they'vegot a bit over the mark this time.' `Still looking for your boot?' `Yes, sir, and mean to find it.' `But, surely, you said that it was a new brown boot?' `So it was, sir. And now it's an old black one.' `What! you don't mean to say----?' `That's just what I do mean to say. I only had threepairs in the world--the new brown, the old black, and thepatent leathers, which I am wearing. Last night they tookone of my brown ones, and to-day they have sneaked oneof the black. Well, have you got it? Speak out, man, anddon't stand staring!'  An agitated German waiter had appeared upon thescene.  `No, sir; I have made inquiry all over the hotel, but Ican hear no word of it.'  `Well, either that boot comes back before sundown orI'll see the manager and tell him that I go right straight outof this hotel.'  `It shall be found, sir--I promise you that if you willhave a little patience it will be found.'  `Mind it is, for it's the last thing of mine that I'll lose inthis den of thieves. Well, well, Mr. Holmes, you'll excusemy troubling you about such a trifle----`  `I think it's well worth troubling about.'  `Why, you look very serious over it.'  `How do you explain it?'  `I just don't attempt to explain it. It seems the verymaddest, queerest thing that ever happened to me.'  `The queerest perhaps----' said Holmes, thoughtfully.  `What do you make of it yourself?'  `Well, I don't profess to understand it yet. This case ofyours is very complex, Sir Henry. When taken inconjunction with your uncle's death I am not sure that ofall the five hundred cases of capital importance which Ihave handled there is one which cuts so deep. But wehold several threads in our hands, and the odds are thatone or other of them guides us to the truth. We maywaste time in following the wrong one, but sooner or laterwe must come upon the right.' We had a pleasant luncheon in which little was said ofthe business which had brought us together. It was in theprivate sitting-room to which we afterwards repaired thatHolmes asked Baskerville what were his intentions. `To go to Baskerville Hall.' `And when?' `At the end of the week.' `On the whole,' said Holmes, `I think that yourdecision is a wise one. I have ample evidence that you arebeing dogged in London, and amid the millions of thisgreat city it is difficult to discover who these people are orwhat their object can be. If their intentions are evil theymight do you a mischief, and we should be powerless toprevent it. You did not know, Dr. Mortimer, that youwere followed this morning from my house?' Dr. Mortimer started violently. `Followed! By whom?'  `That, unfortunately, is what I cannot tell you. Haveyou among your neighbours or acquaintances onDartmoor any man with a black, full beard?'  `No--or, let me see--why, yes. Barrymore, SirCharles's butler, is a man with a full, black beard.'  `Ha! Where is Barrymore?'  `He is in charge of the Hall.'  `We had best ascertain if he is really there, or if by anypossibility he might be in London.'  `How can you do that?'  `Give me a telegraph form. `Is all ready for Sir Henry?'That will do. Address to Mr. Barrymore, Baskerville Hall.What is the nearest telegraph-office? Grimpen. Very good,we will send a second wire to the postmaster, Grimpen:`Telegram to Mr. Barrymore to be delivered into his ownhand. If absent, please return wire to Sir HenryBaskerville, Northumberland Hotel.' That should let usknow before evening whether Barrymore is at his post inDevonshire or not.'  `That's so,' said Baskerville. `By the way, Dr.Mortimer, who is this Barrymore, anyhow?'  `He is the son of the old caretaker, who is dead. Theyhave looked after the Hall for four generations now. So faras I know, he and his wife are as respectable a couple asany in the county.' `At the same time,' said Baskerville, `it's clear enoughthat so long as there are none of the family at the Hallthese people have a mighty fine home and nothing to do.' `That is true.' `Did Barrymore profit at all by Sir Charles's will?' askedHolmes. `He and his wife had five hundred pounds each.' `Ha! Did they know that they would receive this?' `Yes; Sir Charles was very fond of talking about theprovisions of his will.' `That is very interesting.' `I hope,' said Dr. Mortimer, `that you do not look withsuspicious eyes upon everyone who received a legacy fromSir Charles, for I also had a thousand pounds left to me.' `Indeed! And anyone else?' `There were many insignificant sums to individuals, anda large number of public charities. The residue all went toSir Henry.' `And how much was the residue?' `Seven hundred and forty thousand pounds.' Holmes raised his eyebrows in surprise. `I had no ideathat so gigantic a sum was involved,' said he. `Sir Charles had the reputation of being rich, but wedid not know how very rich he was until we came toexamine his securities. The total value of the estate wasclose on to a million.' `Dear me! It is a stake for which a man might well playa desperate game. And one more question, Dr. Mortimer.Supposing that anything happened to our young friendhere--you will forgive the unpleasant hypothesis!--whowould inherit the estate?' `Since Rodger Baskerville, Sir Charles's youngerbrother died unmarried, the estate would descend to theDesmonds, who are distant cousins. James Desmond is anelderly clergyman in Westmoreland.' `Thank you. These details are all of great interest. Haveyou met Mr. James Desmond?' `Yes; he once came down to visit Sir Charles. He is aman of venerable appearance and of saintly life. Iremember that he refused to accept any settlement fromSir Charles, though he pressed it upon him.' `And this man of simple tastes would be the heir to SirCharles's thousands.' `He would be the heir to the estate because that isentailed. He would also be the heir to the money unless itwere willed otherwise by the present owner, who can, ofcourse, do what he likes with it.' `And have you made your will, Sir Henry?' `No, Mr. Holmes, I have not. I've had no time, for itwas only yesterday that I learned how matters stood. Butin any case I feel that the money should go with the titleand estate. That was my poor uncle's idea. How is theowner going to restore the glories of the Baskervilles if hehas not money enough to keep up the property? House,land, and dollars must go together.' `Quite so. Well, Sir Henry, I am of one mind with youas to the advisability of your going down to Devonshirewithout delay. There is only one provision which I mustmake. You certainly must not go alone.' `Dr. Mortimer returns with me.' `But Dr. Mortimer has his practice to attend to, and hishouse is miles away from yours. With all the good will inthe world he may be unable to help you. No, Sir Henry,you must take with you someone, a trusty man, who willbe always by your side.' `Is it possible that you could come yourself, Mr.Holmes?' `If matters came to a crisis I should endeavour to bepresent in person; but you can understand that, with myextensive consulting practice and with the constant appealswhich reach me from many quarters, it is impossible forme to be absent from London for an indefinite time. Atthe present instant one of the most revered names inEngland is being besmirched by a blackmailer, and only Ican stop a disastrous scandal. You will see how impossibleit is for me to go to Dartmoor.'  `Whom would you recommend, then?'  Holmes laid his hand upon my arm.  `If my friend would undertake it there is no man who isbetter worth having at your side when you are in a tightplace. No one can say so more confidently than I.'  The proposition took me completely by surprise, butbefore I had time to answer, Baskerville seized me by thehand and wrung it heartily.  `Well, now, that is real kind of you, Dr. Watson,' saidhe. `You see how it is with me, and you know just asmuch about the matter as I do. If you will come down toBaskerville Hall and see me through I'll never forget it.'  The promise of adventure had always a fascination forme, and I was complimented by the words of Holmes andby the eagerness with which the baronet hailed me as acompanion. `I will come, with pleasure,' said I. `I do not know howI could employ my time better.' `And you will report very carefully to me,' saidHolmes. `When a crisis comes, as it will do, I will directhow you shall act. I suppose that by Saturday all might beready?' `Would that suit Dr. Watson?' `Perfectly.' `Then on Saturday, unless you hear to the contrary, weshall meet at the 10:30 train from Paddington.' We had risen to depart when Baskerville gave a cry, oftriumph, and diving into one of the corners of the roomhe drew a brown boot from under a cabinet. `My missing boot!' he cried. `May all our difficulties vanish as easily!' said SherlockHolmes. `But it is a very singular thing,' Dr. Mortimerremarked. `I searched this room carefully before lunch.' `And so did I,' said Baskerville. `Every inch of it.' `There was certainly no boot in it then.' `In that case the waiter must have placed it there whilewe were lunching.' The German was sent for but professed to knownothing of the matter, nor could any inquiry clear it up.Another item had been added to that constant andapparently purposeless series of small mysteries which hadsucceeded each other so rapidly. Setting aside the wholegrim story of Sir Charles's death, we had a line ofinexplicable incidents all within the limits of two days,which included the receipt of the printed letter, the black-bearded spy in the hansom, the loss of the new brownboot, the loss of the old black boot, and now the return ofthe new brown boot. Holmes sat in silence in the cab aswe drove back to Baker Street, and I knew from hisdrawn brows and keen face that his mind, like my own,was busy in endeavouring to frame some scheme intowhich all these strange and apparently disconnectedepisodes could be fitted. All afternoon and late into theevening he sat lost in tobacco and thought.  Just before dinner two telegrams were handed in. Thefirst ran:--  `Have just heard that Barrymore is at the Hall.--BASKERVILLE.' The second:--  `Visited twenty-three hotels as directed, but sorry, toreport  unable to   trace cut sheet  of Times.--CARTWRIGHT.' `There go two of my threads, Watson. There is nothingmore stimulating than a case where everything goes againstyou. We must cast round for another scent.' `We have still the cabman who drove the spy.' `Exactly. I have wired to get his name and address fromthe Official Registry. I should not be surprised if this werean answer to my question.' The ring at the bell proved to be something even moresatisfactory than an answer, however, for the door openedand a rough-looking fellow entered who was evidently theman himself. `I got a message from the head office that a gent at thisaddress had been inquiring for 2704,' said he. `I've drivenmy cab this seven years and never a word of complaint. Icame here straight from the Yard to ask you to your facewhat you had against me.' `I have nothing in the world against you, my goodman,' said Holmes. `On the contrary, I have half asovereign for you if you will give me a clear answer to myquestions.' `Well, I've had a good day and no mistake,' said thecabman, with a grin. `What was it you wanted to ask, sir?' `First of all your name and address, in case I want youagain.' `John Clayton, 3 Turpey Street, the Borough. My cabis out of Shipley's Yard, near Waterloo Station.' Sherlock Holmes made a note of it. `Now, Clayton, tell me all about the fare who cameand watched this house at ten o'clock this morning andafterwards followed the two gentlemen down RegentStreet.' The man looked surprised and a little embarrassed.`Why, there's no good my telling you things, for you seemto know as much as I do already,' said he. `The truth isthat the gentleman told me that he was a detective andthat I was to say nothing about him to anyone.' `My good fellow, this is a very serious business, andyou may find yourself in a pretty bad position if you try tohide anything from me. You say that your fare told youthat he was a detective?' `Yes, he did.' `When did he say this?' `When he left me.' `Did he say anything more?' `He mentioned his name.' Holmes cast a swift glance of triumph at me. `Oh, hementioned his name, did he? That was imprudent. Whatwas the name that he mentioned?' `His name,' said the cabman, `was Mr. SherlockHolmes.' Never have I seen my friend more completely takenaback than by the cabman's reply. For an instant he sat insilent amazement. Then he burst into a hearty laugh. `A touch, Watson--an undeniable touch!' said he. `Ifeel a foil as quick and supple as my own. He got homeupon me very prettily that time. So his name was SherlockHolmes, was it?' `Yes, sir, that was the gentleman's name.' `Excellent! Tell me where you picked him up and allthat occurred.' `He hailed me at half-past nine in Trafalgar Square. Hesaid that he was a detective, and he offered me twoguineas if I would do exactly what he wanted all day andask no questions. I was glad enough to agree. First wedrove down to the Northumberland Hotel and waitedthere until two gentlemen came out and took a cab fromthe rank. We followed their cab until it pulled upsomewhere near here.' `This very door,' said Holmes. `Well, I couldn't be sure of that, but I dare say my fareknew all about it. We pulled up half-way down the streetand waited an hour and a half. Then the two gentlemenpassed us, walking, and we followed down Baker Streetand along ----` `I know,' said Holmes. `Until we got three-quarters down Regent Street.Then my gentleman threw up the trap, and he cried that Ishould drive right away to Waterloo Station as hard as Icould go. I whipped up the mare and we were thereunder the ten minutes. Then he paid up his two guineas,like a good one, and away he went into the station. Onlyjust as he was leaving he turned round and he said: `Itmight interest you to know that you have been drivingMr. Sherlock Holmes.' That's how I come to know thename.' `I see. And you saw no more of him?' `Not after he went into the station.' `And how would you describe Mr. Sherlock Holmes?' The cabman scratched his head. `Well, he wasn'taltogether such an easy gentleman to describe. I'd put himat forty years of age, and he was of a middle height, two orthree inches shorter than you, sir. He was dressed like atoff, and he had a black beard, cut square at the end, and apale face. I don't know as I could say more than that.' `Colour of his eyes?' `No, I can't say that.' `Nothing more that you can remember?' `No, sir; nothing.' `Well, then, here is your half-sovereign. There'sanother one waiting for you if you can bring any moreinformation. Good night!' `Good night, sir, and thank you!' John Clayton departed chuckling, and Holmes turnedto me with a shrug of his shoulders and a rueful smile. `Snap goes our third thread, and we end where webegan,' said he. `The cunning rascal! He knew ournumber, knew that Sir Henry Baskerville had consultedme, spotted who I was in Regent Street, conjectured thatI had got the number of the cab and would lay my handson the driver, and so sent back this audacious message. Itell you, Watson, this time we have got a foeman who isworthy of our steel. I've been checkmated in London. Ican only wish you better luck in Devonshire. But I'm noteasy in my mind about it.' `About what?' `About sending you. It's an ugly business, Watson, anugly dangerous business, and the more I see of it the less Ilike it. Yes, my dear fellow, you may laugh, but I give youmy word that I shall be very glad to have you back safeand sound in Baker Street once more.'         
       Baskerville Hall Sir Henry Baskerville and Dr. Mortimer were readyupon the appointed day, and we started as arranged forDevonshire. Mr. Sherlock Holmes drove with me to thestation and gave me his last parting injunctions and advice. `I will not bias your mind by suggesting theories orsuspicions, Watson,' said he; `I wish you simply to reportfacts in the fullest possible manner to me, and you canleave me to do the theorizing.' `What sort of facts?' I asked. `Anything which may seem to have a bearing howeverindirect upon the case, and especially the relationsbetween young Baskerville and his neighbours or any freshparticulars concerning the death of Sir Charles. I havemade some inquiries myself in the last few days, but theresults have, I fear, been negative. One thing only appearsto be certain, and that is that Mr. James Desmond, who isthe next heir, is an elderly gentleman of a very amiabledisposition, so that this persecution does not arise fromhim. I really think that we may eliminate him entirelyfrom our calculations. There remain the people who willactually surround Sir Henry Baskerville upon the moor.' `Would it not be well in the first place to get rid of thisBarrymore couple?' `By no means. You could not make a greater mistake.If they are innocent it would be a cruel injustice, and ifthey are guilty we should be giving up all chance ofbringing it home to them. No, no, we will preserve themupon our list of suspects. Then there is a groom at theHall, if I remember right. There are two moorlandfarmers. There is our friend Dr. Mortimer, whom Ibelieve to be entirely honest, and there is his wife, ofwhom we know nothing. There is this naturalist,Stapleton, and there is his sister, who is said to be a younglady of attractions. There is Mr. Frankland, of Lafter Hall,who is also an unknown factor, and there are one or twoother neighbours. These are the folk who must be yourvery special study.' `I will do my best.' `You have arms, I suppose?' `Yes, I thought it as well to take them.' `Most certainly. Keep your revolver near you night andday, and never relax your precautions.' Our friends had already secured a first-class carriage andwere waiting for us upon the platform. `No, we have no news of any kind,' said Dr. Mortimerin answer to my friend's questions. `I can swear to onething, and that is that we have not been shadowed duringthe last two days. We have never gone out withoutkeeping a sharp watch, and no one could have escaped ournotice.' `You have always kept together, I presume?' `Except yesterday afternoon. I usually give up one dayto pure amusement when I come to town, so I spent it atthe Museum of the College of Surgeons.' `And I went to look at the folk in the park,' saidBaskerville. `But we had no trouble of any kind.' `It was imprudent, all the same,' said Holmes, shakinghis head and looking very grave. `I beg, Sir Henry, thatyou will not go about alone. Some great misfortune willbefall you if you do. Did you get your other boot?' `No, sir, it is gone forever.' `Indeed. That is very interesting. Well, good-bye,' headded as the train began to glide down the platform. `Bearin mind, Sir Henry, one of the phrases in that queer oldlegend which Dr. Mortimer has read to us, and avoid themoor in those hours of darkness when the powers of evilare exalted.' I looked back at the platform when we had left it farbehind, and saw the tall, austere figure of Holmes standingmotionless and gazing after us. The journey was a swift and pleasant one, and I spent itin making the more intimate acquaintance of my twocompanions and in playing with Dr. Mortimer's spaniel.In a very few hours the brown earth had become ruddy,the brick had changed to granite, and red cows grazed inwell-hedged fields where the lush grasses and moreluxuriant vegetation spoke of a richer, if a damper,climate. Young Baskerville stared eagerly out of thewindow, and cried aloud with delight as he recognized thefamiliar features of the Devon scenery. `I've been over a good part of the world since I left it,Dr. Watson,' said he; `but I have never seen a place tocompare with it.' `I never saw a Devonshire man who did not swear byhis county,' I remarked. `It depends upon the breed of men quite as much as onthe county,' said Dr. Mortimer. `A glance at our friendhere reveals the rounded head of the Celt, which carriesinside it the Celtic enthusiasm and power of attachment.Poor Sir Charles's head was of a very rare type, halfGaelic, half Ivernian in its characteristics. But you werevery young when you last saw Baskerville Hall, were younot?'  `I was a boy in my `teens at the time of my father'sdeath, and had never seen the Hall, for he lived in a littlecottage on the South Coast. Thence I went straight to afriend in America. I tell you it is all as new to me as it is toDr. Watson, and I'm as keen as possible to see the moor.'  `Are you? Then your wish is easily granted, for there isyour first sight of the moor,' said Dr. Mortimer, pointingout of the carriage window.  Over the green squares of the fields and the low curveof a wood there rose in the distance a gray, melancholyhill, with a strange jagged summit, dim and vague in thedistance, like some fantastic landscape in a dream.Baskerville sat for a long time, his eyes fixed upon it, and Iread upon his eager face how much it meant to him, thisfirst sight of that strange spot where the men of his bloodhad held sway so long and left their mark so deep. Therehe sat, with his tweed suit and his American accent, in thecorner of a prosaic railway-carriage, and yet as I looked athis dark and expressive face I felt more than ever how truea descendant he was of that long line of high-blooded,fiery, and masterful men. There were pride, valour, andstrength in his thick brows, his sensitive nostrils, and hislarge hazel eyes. If on that forbidding moor a difficult anddangerous quest should lie before us, this was at least acomrade for whom one might venture to take a risk withthe certainty that he would bravely share it. The train pulled up at a small wayside station and we alldescended. Outside, beyond the low, white fence, awagonette with a pair of cobs was waiting. Our comingwas evidently a great event, for station-master and portersclustered round us to carry out our luggage. It was asweet, simple country spot, but I was surprised to observethat by the gate there stood two soldierly men in darkuniforms, who leaned upon their short rifles and glancedkeenly at us as we passed. The coachman, a hard-faced,gnarled little fellow, saluted Sir Henry Baskerville, and in afew minutes we were flying swiftly down the broad, whiteroad. Rolling pasture lands curved upward on either sideof us, and old gabled houses peeped out from amid thethick green foliage, but behind the peaceful and sunlitcountry-side there rose ever, dark against the evening sky,the long, gloomy curve of the moor, broken by the jaggedand sinister hills. The wagonette swung round into a side road, and wecurved upward through deep lanes worn by centuries ofwheels, high banks on either side, heavy with drippingmoss and fleshy hart's-tongue ferns. Bronzing bracken andmottled bramble gleamed in the light of the sinking sun.Still steadily rising, we passed over a narrow granitebridge, and skirted a noisy stream which gushed swiftlydown, foaming and roaring amid the gray boulders. Bothroad and stream wound up through a valley dense withscrub oak and fir. At every turn Baskerville gave anexclamation of delight, looking eagerly about him andasking countless questions. To his eyes all seemedbeautiful, but to me a tinge of melancholy lay upon thecountry-side, which bore so clearly the mark of thewaning year. Yellow leaves carpeted the lanes andfluttered down upon us as we passed. The rattle of ourwheels died away as we drove through drifts of rottingvegetation--sad gifts, as it seemed to me, for Nature tothrow before the carriage of the returning heir of theBaskervilles. `Halloa!' cried Dr. Mortimer, `what is this?' A steep curve of heath-clad land, an outlying spur ofthe moor, lay in front of us. On the summit, hard andclear like an equestrian statue upon its pedestal, was amounted soldier, dark and stern, his rifle poised ready overhis forearm. He was watching the road along which wetravelled. `What is this, Perkins?' asked Dr. Mortimer. Our driver half turned in his seat. `There's a convict escaped from Princetown, sir. He'sbeen out three days now, and the warders watch everyroad and every station, but they've had no sight of himyet. The farmers about here don't like it, sir, and that's afact.' `Well, I understand that they get five pounds if theycan give information.' `Yes, sir, but the chance of five pounds is but a poorthing compared to the chance of having your throat cut.You see, it isn't like any ordinary convict. This is a manthat would stick at nothing.' `Who is he, then?' `It is Selden, the Notting Hill murderer.' I remembered the case well, for it was one in whichHolmes had taken an interest on account of the peculiarferocity of the crime and the wanton brutality which hadmarked all the actions of the assassin. The commutation ofhis death sentence had been due to some doubts as to hiscomplete sanity, so atrocious was his conduct. Ourwagonette had topped a rise and in front of us rose thehuge expanse of the moor, mottled with gnarled andcraggy cairns and tors. A cold wind swept down from itand set us shivering. Somewhere there, on that desolateplain, was lurking this fiendish man, hiding in a burrowlike a wild beast, his heart full of malignancy against thewhole race which had cast him out. It needed but this tocomplete the grim suggestiveness of the barren waste, thechilling wind, and the darkling sky. Even Baskerville fellsilent and pulled his overcoat more closely around him. We had left the fertile country behind and beneath us.We looked back on it now, the slanting rays of a low sunturning the streams to threads of gold and glowing on thered earth new turned by the plough and the broad tangleof the woodlands. The road in front of us grew bleakerand wilder over huge russet and olive slopes, sprinkledwith giant boulders. Now and then we passed a moorlandcottage, walled and roofed with stone, with no creeper tobreak its harsh outline. Suddenly we looked down into acup-like depression, patched with stunted oaks and firswhich had been twisted and bent by the fury of years ofstorm. Two high, narrow towers rose over the trees. Thedriver pointed with his whip. `Baskerville Hall,' said he. Its master had risen and was staring with flushed cheeksand shining eyes. A few minutes later we had reached thelodge-gates, a maze of fantastic tracery in wrought iron,with weather-bitten pillars on either side, blotched withlichens, and surmounted by the boars' heads of theBaskervilles. The lodge was a ruin of black granite andbared ribs of rafters, but facing it was a new building, halfconstructed, the first fruit of Sir Charles's South Africangold. Through the gateway we passed into the avenue,where the wheels were again hushed amid the leaves, andthe old trees shot their branches in a sombre tunnel overour heads. Baskerville shuddered as he looked up the long,dark drive to where the house glimmered like a ghost atthe farther end. `Was it here?' he asked in a low voice. `No, no, the Yew Alley is on the other side.' The young heir glanced round with a gloomy face. `It's no wonder my uncle felt as if trouble were comingon him in such a place as this,' said he. `It's enough toscare any man. I'll have a row of electric lamps up hereinside of six months, and you won't know it again, with athousand candle-power Swan and Edison right here infront of the hall door.' The avenue opened into a broad expanse of turf, andthe house lay before us. In the fading light I could see thatthe centre was a heavy block of building from which aporch projected. The whole front was draped in ivy, witha patch clipped bare here and there where a window or acoat-of-arms broke through the dark veil. >From thiscentral block rose the twin towers, ancient, crenelated,and pierced with many loopholes. To right and left of theturrets were more modern wings of black granite. A dulllight shone through heavy mullioned windows, and fromthe high chimneys which rose from the steep, high-angledroof there sprang a single black column of smoke. `Welcome, Sir Henry! Welcome to Baskerville Hall!' A tall man had stepped from the shadow of the porchto open the door of the wagonette. The figure of awoman was silhouetted against the yellow light of the hall.She came out and helped the man to hand down our bags. `You don't mind my driving straight home, Sir Henry?'said Dr. Mortimer. `My wife is expecting me.' `Surely you will stay and have some dinner?' `No, I must go. I shall probably find some workawaiting me. I would stay to show you over the house,but Barrymore will be a better guide than I. Good-bye,and never hesitate night or day to send for me if I can beof service.' The wheels died away down the drive while Sir Henryand I turned into the hall, and the door clanged heavilybehind us. It was a fine apartment in which we foundourselves, large, lofty, and heavily raftered with huge balksof age-blackened oak. In the great old-fashioned fireplacebehind the high iron dogs a log-fire crackled and snapped.Sir Henry and I held out our hands to it, for we werenumb from our long drive. Then we gazed round us atthe high, thin window of old stained glass, the oakpanelling, the stags' heads, the coats-of-arms upon thewalls, all dim and sombre in the subdued light of thecentral lamp. `It's just as I imagined it,' said Sir Henry. `Is it not thevery picture of an old family home? To think that thisshould be the same hall in which for five hundred yearsmy people have lived. It strikes me solemn to think of it.' I saw his dark face lit up with a boyish enthusiasm as hegazed about him. The light beat upon him where hestood, but long shadows trailed down the walls and hunglike a black canopy above him. Barrymore had returnedfrom taking our luggage to our rooms. He stood in frontof us now with the subdued manner of a well-trainedservant.  He  was   a  remarkable-looking man,   tall,handsome,   with   a  square  black beard  and pale,distinguished features. `Would you wish dinner to be served at once, sir?' `Is it ready?' `In a very few minutes, sir. You will find hot water inyour rooms. My wife and I will be happy, Sir Henry, tostay with you until you have made your fresharrangements, but you will understand that under the newconditions this house will require a considerable staff.' `What new conditions?' `I only meant, sir, that Sir Charles led a very retired life,and we were able to look after his wants. You would,naturally, wish to have more company, and so you willneed changes in your household.' `Do you mean that your wife and you wish to leave?' `Only when it is quite convenient to you, sir.' `But your family have been with us for severalgenerations, have they not? I should be sorry to begin mylife here by breaking an old family connection.' I seemed to discern some signs of emotion upon thebutler's white face. `I feel that also, sir, and so does my wife. But to tell thetruth, sir, we were both very much attached to SirCharles, and his death gave us a shock and made thesesurroundings very painful to us. I fear that we shall neveragain be easy in our minds at Baskerville Hall.' `But what do you intend to do?' `I have no doubt, sir, that we shall succeed inestablishing ourselves in some business. Sir Charles'sgenerosity has given us the means to do so. And now, sir,perhaps I had best show you to your rooms.' A square balustraded gallery ran round the top of theold hall, approached by a double stair. From this centralpoint two long corridors extended the whole length of thebuilding, from which all the bedrooms opened. My ownwas in the same wing as Baskerville's and almost next doorto it. These rooms appeared to be much more modernthan the central part of the house, and the bright paperand numerous candles did something to remove thesombre impression which our arrival had left upon mymind. But the dining-room which opened out of the hall wasa place of shadow and gloom. It was a long chamber witha step separating the dais where the family sat from thelower portion reserved for their dependents. At one end aminstrel's gallery overlooked it. Black beams shot acrossabove our heads, with a smoke-darkened ceiling beyondthem. With rows of flaring torches to light it up, and thecolour and rude hilarity of an old-time banquet, it mighthave softened; but now, when two black-clothedgentlemen sat in the little circle of light thrown by ashaded lamp, one's voice became hushed and one's spiritsubdued. A dim line of ancestors, in every variety of dress,from the Elizabethan knight to the buck of the Regency,stared down upon us and daunted us by their silentcompany. We talked little, and I for one was glad whenthe meal was over and we were able to retire into themodern billiard-room and smoke a cigarette.  `My word, it isn't a very cheerful place,' said Sir Henry.`I suppose one can tone down to it, but I feel a bit out ofthe picture at present. I don't wonder that my uncle got alittle jumpy if he lived all alone in such a house as this.However, if it suits you, we will retire early to-night, andperhaps things may seem more cheerful in the morning.'  I drew aside my curtains before I went to bed andlooked out from my window. It opened upon the grassyspace which lay in front of the hall door. Beyond, twocopses of trees moaned and swung in a rising wind. A halfmoon broke through the rifts of racing clouds. In its coldlight I saw beyond the trees a broken fringe of rocks, andthe long, low curve of the melancholy moor. I closed thecurtain, feeling that my last impression was in keepingwith the rest. And yet it was not quite the last. I found myself wearyand yet wakeful, tossing restlessly from side to side,seeking for the sleep which would not come. Far away achiming clock struck out the quarters of the hours, butotherwise a deathly silence lay upon the old house. Andthen suddenly, in the very dead of the night, there came asound to my ears, clear, resonant, and unmistakable. It wasthe sob of a woman, the muffled, strangling gasp of onewho is torn by an uncontrollable sorrow. I sat up in bedand listened intently. The noise could not have been faraway and was certainly in the house. For half an hour Iwaited with every nerve on the alert, but there came noother sound save the chiming clock and the rustle of theivy on the wall.         
   The Stapletons of Merripit House  The fresh beauty of the following morning didsomething to efface from our minds the grim and grayimpression which had been left upon both of us by ourfirst experience of Baskerville Hall. As Sir Henry and I satat breakfast the sunlight flooded in through the highmullioned windows, throwing watery patches of colourfrom the coats of arms which covered them. The darkpanelling glowed like bronze in the golden rays, and it washard to realize that this was indeed the chamber which hadstruck such a gloom into our souls upon the eveningbefore.  `I guess it is ourselves and not the house that we haveto blame!' said the baronet. `We were tired with ourjourney and chilled by our drive, so we took a gray viewof the place. Now we are fresh and well, so it is allcheerful once more.'  `And yet it was not entirely a question of imagination,'I answered. `Did you, for example, happen to hearsomeone, a woman I think, sobbing in the night?'          
 `That is curious, for I did when I was half asleep fancythat I heard something of the sort. I waited quite a time,but there was no more of it, so I concluded that it was alla dream.' `I heard it distinctly, and I am sure that it was really thesob of a woman.' `We must ask about this right away.' He rang the belland asked Barrymore whether he could account for ourexperience. It seemed to me that the pallid features of thebutler turned a shade paler still as he listened to hismaster's question. `There are only two women in the house, Sir Henry,'he answered. `One is the scullery-maid, who sleeps in theother wing. The other is my wife, and I can answer for itthat the sound could not have come from her.' And yet he lied as he said it, for it chanced that afterbreakfast I met Mrs. Barrymore in the long corridor withthe sun full upon her face. She was a large, impassive,heavy-featured woman with a stern set expression ofmouth. But her tell-tale eyes were red and glanced at mefrom between swollen lids. It was she, then, who wept inthe night, and if she did so her husband must know it. Yethe had taken the obvious risk of discovery in declaringthat it was not so. Why had he done this? And why did          
she weep so bitterly? Already round this pale-faced,handsome, black-bearded man there was gathering anatmosphere of mystery and of gloom. It was he who hadbeen the first to discover the body of Sir Charles, and wehad only his word for all the circumstances which led upto the old man's death. Was it possible that it wasBarrymore after all whom we had seen in the cab inRegent Street? The beard might well have been the same.The cabman had described a somewhat shorter man, butsuch an impression might easily have been erroneous.How could I settle the point forever? Obviously the firstthing to do was to see the Grimpen postmaster, and findwhether the test telegram had really been placed inBarrymore's own hands. Be the answer what it might, Ishould at least have something to report to SherlockHolmes. Sir Henry had numerous papers to examine afterbreakfast, so that the time was propitious for myexcursion. It was a pleasant walk of four miles along theedge of the moor, leading me at last to a small grayhamlet, in which two larger buildings, which proved to bethe inn and the house of Dr. Mortimer, stood high abovethe rest. The postmaster, who was also the village grocer,had a clear recollection of the telegram.          
  `Certainly, sir,' said he, `I had the telegram delivered toMr. Barrymore exactly as directed.'  `Who delivered it?'  `My boy here. James, you delivered that telegram toMr. Barrymore at the Hall last week, did you not?'  `Yes, father, I delivered it.'  `Into his own hands?' I asked.  `Well, he was up in the loft at the time, so that I couldnot put it into his own hands, but I gave it into Mrs.Barrymore's hands, and she promised to deliver it at once.'  `Did you see Mr. Barrymore?'  `No, sir; I tell you he was in the loft.'  `If you didn't see him, how do you know he was in theloft?'  `Well, surely his own wife ought to know where he is,'said the postmaster testily. `Didn't he get the telegram? Ifthere is any mistake it is for Mr. Barrymore himself tocomplain.'  It seemed hopeless to pursue the inquiry any farther,but it was clear that in spite of Holmes's ruse we had noproof that Barrymore had not been in London all thetime. Suppose that it were so--suppose that the same manhad been the last who had seen Sir Charles alive, and thefirst to dog the new heir when he returned to England.          
What then? Was he the agent of others or had he somesinister design of his own? What interest could he have inpersecuting the Baskerville family? I thought of the strangewarning clipped out of the leading article of the Times.Was that his work or was it possibly the doing of someonewho was bent upon counteracting his schemes? The onlyconceivable motive was that which had been suggested bySir Henry, that if the family could be scared away acomfortable and permanent home would be secured forthe Barrymores. But surely such an explanation as thatwould be quite inadequate to account for the deep andsubtle scheming which seemed to be weaving an invisiblenet round the young baronet. Holmes himself had saidthat no more complex case had come to him in all thelong series of his sensational investigations. I prayed, as Iwalked back along the gray, lonely road, that my friendmight soon be freed from his preoccupations and able tocome down to take this heavy burden of responsibilityfrom my shoulders. Suddenly my thoughts were interrupted by the soundof running feet behind me and by a voice which called meby name. I turned, expecting to see Dr. Mortimer, but tomy surprise it was a stranger who was pursuing me. Hewas a small, slim, clean-shaven, prim-faced man, flaxen-          
haired and lean-jawed, between thirty and forty years ofage, dressed in a gray suit and wearing a straw hat. A tinbox for botanical specimens hung over his shoulder and hecarried a green butterfly-net in one of his hands.  `You will, I am sure, excuse my presumption, Dr.Watson,' said he, as he came panting up to where I stood.`Here on the moor we are homely folk and do not waitfor formal introductions. You may possibly have heard myname from our mutual friend, Mortimer. I am Stapleton,of Merripit House.'  `Your net and box would have told me as much,' saidI, `for I knew that Mr. Stapleton was a naturalist. But howdid you know me?'  `I have been calling on Mortimer, and he pointed youout to me from the window of his surgery as you passed.As our road lay the same way I thought that I wouldovertake you and introduce myself. I trust that Sir Henryis none the worse for his journey?'  `He is very well, thank you.'  `We were all rather afraid that after the sad death of SirCharles the new baronet might refuse to live here. It isasking much of a wealthy man to come down and buryhimself in a place of this kind, but I need not tell you that          
it means a very great deal to the country-side. Sir Henryhas, I suppose, no superstitious fears in the matter?' `I do not think that it is likely.' `Of course you know the legend of the fiend dogwhich haunts the family?' `I have heard it.' `It is extraordinary how credulous the peasants areabout here! Any number of them are ready to swear thatthey have seen such a creature upon the moor.' He spokewith a smile, but I seemed to read in his eyes that he tookthe matter more seriously. `The story took a great holdupon the imagination of Sir Charles, and I have no doubtthat it led to his tragic end.' `But how?' `His nerves were so worked up that the appearance ofany dog might have had a fatal effect upon his diseasedheart. I fancy that he really did see something of the kindupon that last night in the Yew Alley. I feared that somedisaster might occur, for I was very fond of the old man,and I knew that his heart was weak.' `How did you know that?' `My friend Mortimer told me.' `You think, then, that some dog pursued Sir Charles,and that he died of fright in consequence?'          
 `Have you any better explanation?' `I have not come to any conclusion.' `Has Mr. Sherlock Holmes?' The words took away my breath for an instant, but aglance at the placid face and steadfast eyes of mycompanion showed that no surprise was intended. `It is useless for us to pretend that we do not know you,Dr. Watson,' said he. `The records of your detective havereached us here, and you could not celebrate him withoutbeing known yourself. When Mortimer told me yourname he could not deny your identity. If you are here,then it follows that Mr. Sherlock Holmes is interestinghimself in the matter, and I am naturally curious to knowwhat view he may take.' `I am afraid that I cannot answer that question.' `May I ask if he is going to honour us with a visithimself?' `He cannot leave town at present. He has other caseswhich engage his attention.' `What a pity! He might throw some light on thatwhich is so dark to us. But as to your own researches, ifthere is any possible way in which I can be of service toyou I trust that you will command me. If I had anyindication of the nature of your suspicions or how youpropose to investigate the case, I might perhaps even nowgive you some aid or advice.'  `I assure you that I am simply here upon a visit to myfriend, Sir Henry, and that I need no help of any kind.'  `Excellent!' said Stapleton. `You are perfectly right tobe wary and discreet. I am justly reproved for what I feelwas an unjustifiable intrusion, and I promise you that Iwill not mention the matter again.'  We had come to a point where a narrow grassy pathstruck off from the road and wound away across the moor.A steep, boulder-sprinkled hill lay upon the right whichhad in bygone days been cut into a granite quarry. Theface which was turned towards us formed a dark cliff, withferns and brambles growing in its niches. From over adistant rise there floated a gray plume of smoke.  `A moderate walk along this moor-path brings us toMerripit House,' said he. `Perhaps you will spare an hourthat I may have the pleasure of introducing you to mysister.'  My first thought was that I should be by Sir Henry'sside. But then I remembered the pile of papers and billswith which his study table was littered. It was certain thatI could not help with those. And Holmes had expresslysaid that I should study the neighbours upon the moor. I          
accepted Stapleton's invitation, and we turned togetherdown the path. `It is a wonderful place, the moor,' said he, lookinground over the undulating downs, long green rollers, withcrests of jagged granite foaming up into fantastic surges.`You never tire of the moor. You cannot think thewonderful secrets which it contains. It is so vast, and sobarren, and so mysterious.' `You know it well, then?' `I have only been here two years. The residents wouldcall me a newcomer. We came shortly after Sir Charlessettled. But my tastes led me to explore every part of thecountry round, and I should think that there are few menwho know it better than I do.' `Is it hard to know?' `Very hard. You see, for example, this great plain to thenorth here with the queer hills breaking out of it. Do youobserve anything remarkable about that?' `It would be a rare place for a gallop.' `You would naturally think so and the thought has costseveral their lives before now. You notice those brightgreen spots scattered thickly over it?' `Yes, they seem more fertile than the rest.' Stapleton laughed.          
 `That is the great Grimpen Mire,' said he. `A false stepyonder means death to man or beast. Only yesterday I sawone of the moor ponies wander into it. He never cameout. I saw his head for quite a long time craning out of thebog-hole, but it sucked him down at last. Even in dryseasons it is a danger to cross it, but after these autumnrains it is an awful place. And yet I can find my way to thevery heart of it and return alive. By George, there isanother of those miserable ponies!' Something brown was rolling and tossing among thegreen sedges. Then a long, agonized, writhing neck shotupward and a dreadful cry echoed over the moor. Itturned me cold with horror, but my companion's nervesseemed to be stronger than mine. `It's gone!' said he. `The mire has him. Two in twodays, and many more, perhaps, for they get in the way ofgoing there in the dry weather, and never know thedifference until the mire has them in its clutches. It's a badplace, the great Grimpen Mire.' `And you say you can penetrate it?' `Yes, there are one or two paths which a very activeman can take. I have found them out.' `But why should you wish to go into so horrible aplace?'          
 `Well, you see the hills beyond? They are really islandscut off on all sides by the impassable mire, which hascrawled round them in the course of years. That is wherethe rare plants and the butterflies are, if you have the witto reach them.' `I shall try my luck some day.' He looked at me with a surprised face. `For God's sake put such an idea out of your mind,'said he. `Your blood would be upon my head. I assure youthat there would not be the least chance of your comingback alive. It is only by remembering certain complexlandmarks that I am able to do it.' `Halloa!' I cried. `What is that?' A long, low moan, indescribably sad, swept over themoor. It filled the whole air, and yet it was impossible tosay whence it came. From a dull murmur it swelled into adeep roar, and then sank back into a melancholy,throbbing murmur once again. Stapleton looked at mewith a curious expression in his face. `Queer place, the moor!' said he. `But what is it?' `The peasants say it is  
calling for its prey. I've heard it once or twice before, butnever quite so loud.'          
 I looked round, with a chill of fear in my heart, at thehuge swelling plain, mottled with the green patches ofrushes. Nothing stirred over the vast expanse save a pair ofravens, which croaked loudly from a tor behind us. `You are an educated man. You don't believe suchnonsense as that?' said I. `What do you think is the causeof so strange a sound?' `Bogs make queer noises sometimes. It's the mudsettling, or the water rising, or something.' `No, no, that was a living voice.' `Well, perhaps it was. Did you ever hear a bitternbooming?' `No, I never did.' `It's a very rare bird--practically extinct--in Englandnow, but all things are possible upon the moor. Yes, Ishould not be surprised to learn that what we have heard isthe cry of the last of the bitterns.' `It's the weirdest, strangest thing that ever I heard inmy life.' `Yes, it's rather an uncanny place altogether. Look atthe hill- side yonder. What do you make of those?' The whole steep slope was covered with gray circularrings of stone, a score of them at least. `What are they? Sheep-pens?'          
 `No, they are the homes of our worthy ancestors.Prehistoric man lived thickly on the moor, and as no onein particular has lived there since, we find all his littlearrangements exactly as he left them. These are hiswigwams with the roofs off. You can even see his hearthand his couch if you have the curiosity to go inside. `But it is quite a town. When was it inhabited?' `Neolithic man--no date.' `What did he do?' `He grazed his cattle on these slopes, and he learned todig for tin when the bronze sword began to supersede thestone axe. Look at the great trench in the opposite hill.That is his mark. Yes, you will find some very singularpoints about the moor, Dr. Watson. Oh, excuse me aninstant! It is surely Cyclopides.' A small fly or moth had fluttered across our path, andin an instant Stapleton was rushing with extraordinaryenergy and speed in pursuit of it. To my dismay thecreature flew straight for the great mire, and myacquaintance never paused for an instant, bounding fromtuft to tuft behind it, his green net waving in the air. Hisgray clothes and jerky, zigzag, irregular progress made himnot unlike some huge moth himself. I was standingwatching his pursuit with a mixture of admiration for his          
extraordinary activity and fear lest he should lose hisfooting in the treacherous mire, when I heard the soundof steps, and turning round found a woman near me uponthe path. She had come from the direction in which theplume of smoke indicated the position of Merripit House,but the dip of the moor had hid her until she was quiteclose. I could not doubt that this was the Miss Stapleton ofwhom I had been told, since ladies of any sort must be fewupon the moor, and I remembered that I had heardsomeone describe her as being a beauty. The woman whoapproached me was certainly that, and of a mostuncommon type. There could not have been a greatercontrast between brother and sister, for Stapleton wasneutral tinted, with light hair and gray eyes, while she wasdarker than any brunette whom I have seen in England--slim, elegant, and tall. She had a proud, finely cut face, soregular that it might have seemed impassive were it not forthe sensitive mouth and the beautiful dark, eager eyes.With her perfect figure and elegant dress she was, indeed,a strange apparition upon a lonely moorland path. Hereyes were on her brother as I turned, and then shequickened her pace towards me. I had raised my hat and          
was about to make some explanatory remark, when herown words turned all my thoughts into a new channel. `Go back!' she said. `Go straight back to London,instantly.' I could only stare at her in stupid surprise. Her eyesblazed at me, and she tapped the ground impatiently withher foot. `Why should I go back?' I asked. `I cannot explain.' She spoke in a low, eager voice,with a curious lisp in her utterance. `But for God's sake dowhat I ask you. Go back and never set foot upon themoor again.' `But I have only just come.' `Man, man!' she cried. `Can you not tell when awarning is for your own good? Go back to London! Startto-night! Get away from this place at all costs! Hush, mybrother is coming! Not a word of what I have said. Wouldyou mind getting that orchid for me among the mares-tailsyonder? We are very rich in orchids on the moor, though,of course, you are rather late to see the beauties of theplace.' Stapleton had abandoned the chase and came back to usbreathing hard and flushed with his exertions.          
 `Halloa, Beryl!' said he, and it seemed to me that thetone of his greeting was not altogether a cordial one. `Well, Jack, you are very hot.' `Yes, I was chasing a Cyclopides. He is very rare andseldom found in the late autumn. What a pity that Ishould have missed him!' He spoke unconcernedly, but hissmall light eyes glanced incessantly from the girl to me. `You have introduced yourselves, I can see.' `Yes. I was telling Sir Henry that it was rather late forhim to see the true beauties of the moor.' `Why, who do you think this is?' `I imagine that it must be Sir Henry Baskerville.' `No, no,' said I. `Only a humble commoner, but hisfriend. My name is Dr. Watson.' A flush of vexation passed over her expressive face. `Wehave been talking at cross purposes,' said she. `Why, you had not very much time for talk,' herbrother remarked with the same questioning eyes. `I talked as if Dr. Watson were a resident instead ofbeing merely a visitor,' said she. `It cannot much matter tohim whether it is early or late for the orchids. But you willcome on, will you not, and see Merripit House?' A short walk brought us to it, a bleak moorland house,once the farm of some grazier in the old prosperous days,          
but now put into repair and turned into a moderndwelling. An orchard surrounded it, but the trees, as isusual upon the moor, were stunted and nipped, and theeffect of the whole place was mean and melancholy. Wewere admitted by a strange, wizened, rusty-coated oldmanservant, who seemed in keeping with the house.Inside, however, there were large rooms furnished with anelegance in which I seemed to recognize the taste of thelady. As I looked from their windows at the interminablegranite-flecked moor rolling unbroken to the farthesthorizon I could not but marvel at what could havebrought this highly educated man and this beautifulwoman to live in such a place. `Queer spot to choose, is it not?' said he as if in answerto my thought. `And yet we manage to make ourselvesfairly happy, do we not, Beryl?' `Quite happy,' said she, but there was no ring ofconviction in her words. `I had a school,' said Stapleton. `It was in the northcountry. The work to a man of my temperament wasmechanical and uninteresting, but the privilege of livingwith youth, of helping to mould those young minds, andof impressing them with one's own character and ideals,was very dear to me. However, the fates were against us.          
A serious epidemic broke out in the school and three ofthe boys died. It never recovered from the blow, andmuch of my capital was irretrievably swallowed up. Andyet, if it were not for the loss of the charmingcompanionship of the boys, I could rejoice over my ownmisfortune, for, with my strong tastes for botany andzoology, I find an unlimited field of work here, and mysister is as devoted to Nature as I am. All this, Dr. Watson,has been brought upon your head by your expression asyou surveyed the moor out of our window.'  `It certainly did cross my mind that it might be a littledull--less for you, perhaps, than for your sister.'  `No, no, I am never dull,' said she, quickly.  `We have books, we have our studies, and we haveinteresting neighbours. Dr. Mortimer is a most learnedman in his own line. Poor Sir Charles was also anadmirable companion. We knew him well, and miss himmore than I can tell. Do you think that I should intrude ifI were to call this afternoon and make the acquaintance ofSir Henry?'  `I am sure that he would be delighted.'  `Then perhaps you would mention that I propose to doso. We may in our humble way do something to makethings more easy for him until he becomes accustomed to          
his new surroundings. Will you come upstairs, Dr.Watson, and inspect my collection of Lepidoptera? I thinkit is the most complete one in the south-west of England.By the time that you have looked through them lunchwill be almost ready.'  But I was eager to get back to my charge. Themelancholy of the moor, the death of the unfortunatepony, the weird sound which had been associated with thegrim legend of the Baskervilles, all these things tinged mythoughts with sadness. Then on the top of these more orless vague impressions there had come the definite anddistinct warning of Miss Stapleton, delivered with suchintense earnestness that I could not doubt that some graveand deep reason lay behind it. I resisted all pressure to stayfor lunch, and I set off at once upon my return journey,taking the grass-grown path by which we had come.  It seems, however, that there must have been someshort cut for those who knew it, for before I had reachedthe road I was astounded to see Miss Stapleton sittingupon a rock by the side of the track. Her face wasbeautifully flushed with her exertions, and she held herhand to her side.  `I have run all the way in order to cut you off, Dr.Watson,' said she. `I had not even time to put on my hat. I          
must not stop, or my brother may miss me. I wanted tosay to you how sorry I am about the stupid mistake I madein thinking that you were Sir Henry. Please forget thewords I said, which have no application whatever to you.' `But I can't forget them, Miss Stapleton,' said I. `I amSir Henry's friend, and his welfare is a very close concernof mine. Tell me why it was that you were so eager thatSir Henry should return to London.' `A woman's whim, Dr. Watson. When you know mebetter you will understand that I cannot always givereasons for what I say or do.' `No, no. I remember the thrill in your voice. Iremember the look in your eyes. Please, please, be frankwith me, Miss Stapleton, for ever since I have been here Ihave been conscious of shadows all round me. Life hasbecome like that great Grimpen Mire, with little greenpatches everywhere into which one may sink and with noguide to point the track. Tell me then what it was thatyou meant, and I will promise to convey your warning toSir Henry.' An expression of irresolution passed for an instant overher face, but her eyes had hardened again when sheanswered me.          
 `You make too much of it, Dr. Watson,' said she. `Mybrother and I were very much shocked by the death of SirCharles. We knew him very intimately, for his favouritewalk was over the moor to our house. He was deeplyimpressed with the curse which hung over the family, andwhen this tragedy came I naturally felt that there must besome grounds for the fears which he had expressed. I wasdistressed therefore when another member of the familycame down to live here, and I felt that he should bewarned of the danger which he will run. That was allwhich I intended to convey. `But what is the danger?' `You know the story of the hound?' `I do not believe in such nonsense.' `But I do. If you have any influence with Sir Henry,take him away from a place which has always been fatal tohis family. The world is wide. Why should he wish to liveat the place of danger?' `Because it is the place of danger. That is Sir Henry'snature. I fear that unless you can give me some moredefinite information than this it would be impossible toget him to move.' `I cannot say anything definite, for I do not knowanything definite.'          
 `I would ask you one more question, Miss Stapleton. Ifyou meant no more than this when you first spoke to me,why should you not wish your brother to overhear whatyou said? There is nothing to which he, or anyone else,could object.' `My brother is very anxious to have the Hall inhabited,for he thinks it is for the good of the poor folk upon themoor. He would be very angry if he knew that I have saidanything which might induce Sir Henry to go away. But Ihave done my duty now and I will say no more. I mustget back, or he will miss me and suspect that I have seenyou. Good-bye!' She turned and had disappeared in a fewminutes among the scattered boulders, while I, with mysoul full of vague fears, pursued my way to BaskervilleHall.          
         
     First Report of Dr. Watson From this point onward I will follow the course ofevents by transcribing my own letters to Mr. SherlockHolmes which lie before me on the table. One page ismissing, but otherwise they are exactly as written andshow my feelings and suspicions of the moment moreaccurately than my memory, clear as it is upon these tragicevents, can possibly do. Baskerville Hall, October 13th. MY DEAR HOLMES,--My previous letters andtelegrams have kept you pretty well up to date as to allthat has occurred in this most God-forsaken corner of theworld. The longer one stays here the more does the spiritof the moor sink into one's soul, its vastness, and also itsgrim charm. When you are once out upon its bosom youhave left all traces of modern England behind you, but onthe other hand you are conscious everywhere of thehomes and the work of the prehistoric people. On all sidesof you as you walk are the houses of these forgotten folk,with their graves and the huge monoliths which aresupposed to have marked their temples. As you look at          
their gray stone huts against the scarred hill-sides you leaveyour own age behind you, and if you were to see a skin-clad, hairy man crawl out from the low door fitting a flint-tipped arrow on to the string of his bow, you would feelthat his presence there was more natural than your own.The strange thing is that they should have lived so thicklyon what must always have been most unfruitful soil. I amno antiquarian, but I could imagine that they were someunwarlike and harried race who were forced to accept thatwhich none other would occupy.  All this, however, is foreign to the mission on whichyou sent me and will probably be very uninteresting toyour severely practical mind. I can still remember yourcomplete indifference as to whether the sun moved roundthe earth or the earth round the sun. Let me, therefore,return to the facts concerning Sir Henry Baskerville.  If you have not had any report within the last few daysit is because up to to-day there was nothing of importanceto relate. Then a very surprising circumstance occurred,which I shall tell you in due course. But, first of all, I mustkeep you in touch with some of the other factors in thesituation.  One of these, concerning which I have said little, is theescaped convict upon the moor. There is strong reason          
now to believe that he has got right away, which is aconsiderable relief to the lonely householders of thisdistrict. A fortnight has passed since his flight, duringwhich he has not been seen and nothing has been heard ofhim. It is surely inconceivable that he could have held outupon the moor during all that time. Of course, so far as hisconcealment goes there is no difficulty at all. Any one ofthese stone huts would give him a hiding-place. But thereis nothing to eat unless he were to catch and slaughter oneof the moor sheep. We think, therefore, that he has gone,and the outlying farmers sleep the better in consequence. We are four able-bodied men in this household, so thatwe could take good care of ourselves, but I confess that Ihave had uneasy moments when I have thought of theStapletons. They live miles from any help. There are onemaid, an old manservant, the sister, and the brother, thelatter not a very strong man. They would be helpless inthe hands of a desperate fellow like this Notting Hillcriminal, if he could once effect an entrance. Both SirHenry and I were concerned at their situation, and it wassuggested that Perkins the groom should go over to sleepthere, but Stapleton would not hear of it. The fact is that our friend, the baronet, begins todisplay a considerable interest in our fair neighbour. It is          
not to be wondered at, for time hangs heavily in thislonely spot to an active man like him, and she is a veryfascinating and beautiful woman. There is somethingtropical and exotic about her which forms a singularcontrast to her cool and unemotional brother. Yet he alsogives the idea of hidden fires. He has certainly a verymarked influence over her, for I have seen her continuallyglance at him as she talked as if seeking approbation forwhat she said. I trust that he is kind to her. There is a dryglitter in his eyes, and a firm set of his thin lips, whichgoes with a positive and possibly a harsh nature. Youwould find him an interesting study. He came over to call upon Baskerville on that first day,and the very next morning he took us both to show us thespot where the legend of the wicked Hugo is supposed tohave had its origin. It was an excursion of some milesacross the moor to a place which is so dismal that it mighthave suggested the story. We found a short valley betweenrugged tors which led to an open, grassy space fleckedover with the white cotton grass. In the middle of it rosetwo great stones, worn and sharpened at the upper end,until they looked like the huge corroding fangs of somemonstrous beast. In every way it corresponded with thescene of the old tragedy. Sir Henry was much interested          
and asked Stapleton more than once whether he did reallybelieve in the possibility of the interference of thesupernatural in the affairs of men. He spoke lightly, but itwas evident that he was very much in earnest. Stapletonwas guarded in his replies, but it was easy to see that hesaid less than he might, and that he would not express hiswhole opinion out of consideration for the feelings of thebaronet. He told us of similar cases, where families hadsuffered from some evil influence, and he left us with theimpression that he shared the popular view upon thematter. On our way back we stayed for lunch at MerripitHouse, and it was there that Sir Henry made theacquaintance of Miss Stapleton. >From the first momentthat he saw her he appeared to be strongly attracted byher, and I am much mistaken if the feeling was notmutual. He referred to her again and again on our walkhome, and since then hardly a day has passed that we havenot seen something of the brother and sister. They dinehere to-night, and there is some talk of our going to themnext week. One would imagine that such a match wouldbe very welcome to Stapleton, and yet I have more thanonce caught a look of the strongest disapprobation in hisface when Sir Henry has been paying some attention to his          
sister. He is much attached to her, no doubt, and wouldlead a lonely life without her, but it would seem theheight of selfishness if he were to stand in the way of hermaking so brilliant a marriage. Yet I am certain that hedoes not wish their intimacy to ripen into love, and I haveseveral times observed that he has taken pains to preventthem from being t^te-...-t^te. By the way, yourinstructions to me never to allow Sir Henry to go outalone will become very much more onerous if a love affairwere to be added to our other difficulties. My popularitywould soon suffer if I were to carry out your orders to theletter.  The other day--Thursday, to be more exact--Dr.Mortimer lunched with us. He has been excavating abarrow at Long Down, and has got a prehistoric skullwhich fills him with great joy. Never was there such asingle-minded enthusiast as he! The Stapletons came inafterwards, and the good doctor took us all to the YewAlley, at Sir Henry's request, to show us exactly howeverything occurred upon that fatal night. It is a long,dismal walk, the Yew Alley, between two high walls ofclipped hedge, with a narrow band of grass upon eitherside. At the far end is an old tumble-down summer-house.Half-way down is the moor-gate, where the old          
gentleman left his cigar-ash. It is a white wooden gatewith a latch. Beyond it lies the wide moor. I rememberedyour theory of the affair and tried to picture all that hadoccurred. As the old man stood there he saw somethingcoming across the moor, something which terrified him sothat he lost his wits, and ran and ran until he died of sheerhorror and exhaustion. There was the long, gloomy tunneldown which he fled. And from what? A sheep-dog of themoor? Or a spectral hound, black, silent, and monstrous?Was there a human agency in the matter? Did the pale,watchful Barrymore know more than he cared to say? Itwas all dim and vague, but always there is the dark shadowof crime behind it. One other neighbour I have met since I wrote last.This is Mr. Frankland, of Lafter Hall, who lives some fourmiles to the south of us. He is an elderly man, red-faced,white-haired, and choleric. His passion is for the Britishlaw, and he has spent a large fortune in litigation. Hefights for the mere pleasure of fighting and is equally readyto take up either side of a question, so that it is no wonderthat he has found it a costly amusement. Sometimes hewill shut up a right of way and defy the parish to makehim open it. At others he will with his own hands teardown some other man's gate and declare that a path has          
existed there from time immemorial, defying the owner toprosecute him for trespass. He is learned in old manorialand communal rights, and he applies his knowledgesometimes in favour of the villagers of Fernworthy andsometimes against them, so that he is periodically eithercarried in triumph down the village street or else burnedin effigy, according to his latest exploit. He is said to haveabout seven lawsuits upon his hands at present, which willprobably swallow up the remainder of his fortune and sodraw his sting and leave him harmless for the future. Apartfrom the law he seems a kindly, good-natured person, andI only mention him because you were particular that Ishould send some description of the people who surroundus. He is curiously employed at present, for, being anamateur astronomer, he has an excellent telescope, withwhich he lies upon the roof of his own house and sweepsthe moor all day in the hope of catching a glimpse of theescaped convict. If he would confine his energies to this allwould be well, but there are rumours that he intends toprosecute Dr. Mortimer for opening a grave without theconsent of the next-of-kin, because he dug up theNeolithic skull in the barrow on Long Down. He helps tokeep our lives from being monotonous and gives a littlecomic relief where it is badly needed.          
 And now, having brought you up to date in theescaped convict, the Stapletons, Dr. Mortimer, andFrankland, of Lafter Hall, let me end on that which is mostimportant and tell you more about the Barrymores, andespecially about the surprising development of last night. First of all about the test telegram, which you sent fromLondon in order to make sure that Barrymore was reallyhere. I have already explained that the testimony of thepostmaster shows that the test was worthless and that wehave no proof one way or the other. I told Sir Henry howthe matter stood, and he at once, in his downright fashion,had Barrymore up and asked him whether he had receivedthe telegram himself. Barrymore said that he had. `Did the boy deliver it into your own hands?' asked SirHenry. Barrymore looked surprised, and considered for a littletime. `No,' said he, `I was in the box-room at the time, andmy wife brought it up to me.' `Did you answer it yourself?' `No; I told my wife what to answer and she wentdown to write it.' In the evening he recurred to the subject of his ownaccord.          
  `I could not quite understand the object of yourquestions this morning, Sir Henry,' said he. `I trust thatthey do not mean that I have done anything to forfeityour confidence?'  Sir Henry had to assure him that it was not so andpacify him by giving him a considerable part of his oldwardrobe, the London outfit having now all arrived.  Mrs. Barrymore is of interest to me. She is a heavy,solid person, very limited, intensely respectable, andinclined to be puritanical. You could hardly conceive aless emotional subject. Yet I have told you how, on thefirst night here, I heard her sobbing bitterly, and since thenI have more than once observed traces of tears upon herface. Some deep sorrow gnaws ever at her heart.Sometimes I wonder if she has a guilty memory whichhaunts her, and sometimes I suspect Barrymore of being adomestic tyrant. I have always felt that there wassomething singular and questionable in this man'scharacter, but the adventure of last night brings all mysuspicions to a head.  And yet it may seem a small matter in itself. You areaware that I am not a very sound sleeper, and since I havebeen on guard in this house my slumbers have been lighterthan ever. Last night, about two in the morning, I was          
aroused by a stealthy step passing my room. I rose, openedmy door, and peeped out. A long black shadow wastrailing down the corridor. It was thrown by a man whowalked softly down the passage with a candle held in hishand. He was in shirt and trousers, with no covering to hisfeet. I could merely see the outline, but his height told methat it was Barrymore. He walked very slowly andcircumspectly, and there was something indescribablyguilty and furtive in his whole appearance. I have told you that the corridor is broken by thebalcony which runs round the hall, but that it is resumedupon the farther side. I waited until he had passed out ofsight and then I followed him. When I came round thebalcony he had reached the end of the farther corridor,and I could see from the glimmer of light through an opendoor that he had entered one of the rooms. Now, all theserooms are unfurnished and unoccupied, so that hisexpedition became more mysterious than ever. The lightshone steadily as if he were standing motionless. I creptdown the passage as noiselessly as I could and peepedround the corner of the door. Barrymore was crouching at the window with thecandle held against the glass. His profile was half turnedtowards me, and his face seemed to be rigid with          
expectation as he stared out into the blackness of themoor. For some minutes he stood watching intently. Thenhe gave a deep groan and with an impatient gesture he putout the light. Instantly I made my way back to my room,and very shortly came the stealthy steps passing once moreupon their return journey. Long afterwards when I hadfallen into a light sleep I heard a key turn somewhere in alock, but I could not tell whence the sound came. What itall means I cannot guess, but there is some secret businessgoing on in this house of gloom which sooner or later weshall get to the bottom of. I do not trouble you with mytheories, for you asked me to furnish you only with facts. Ihave had a long talk with Sir Henry this morning, and wehave made a plan of campaign founded upon myobservations of last night. I will not speak about it justnow, but it should make my next report interestingreading.          
         
    (Second Report of Dr. Watson)   THE LIGHT UPON THE MOOR Baskerville Hall, Oct. 15th. MY DEAR HOLMES,--If I was compelled to leaveyou without much news during the early days of mymission you must acknowledge that I am making up forlost time, and that events are now crowding thick and fastupon us. In my last report I ended upon my top note withBarrymore at the window, and now I have quite a budgetalready which will, unless I am much mistaken,considerably surprise you. Things have taken a turn whichI could not have anticipated. In some ways they havewithin the last forty-eight hours become much clearer andin some ways they have become more complicated. But Iwill tell you all and you shall judge for yourself. Before breakfast on the morning following myadventure I went down the corridor and examined theroom in which Barrymore had been on the night before.The western window through which he had stared sointently has, I noticed, one peculiarity above all other          
windows in the house--it commands the nearest outlookon the moor. There is an opening between two treeswhich enables one from this point of view to look rightdown upon it, while from all the other windows it is onlya distant glimpse which can be obtained. It follows,therefore, that Barrymore, since only this window wouldserve the purpose, must have been looking out forsomething or somebody upon the moor. The night wasvery dark, so that I can hardly imagine how he could havehoped to see anyone. It had struck me that it was possiblethat some love intrigue was on foot. That would haveaccounted for his stealthy movements and also for theuneasiness of his wife. The man is a striking-lookingfellow, very well equipped to steal the heart of a countrygirl, so that this theory seemed to have something tosupport it. That opening of the door which I had heardafter I had returned to my room might mean that he hadgone out to keep some clandestine appointment. So Ireasoned with myself in the morning, and I tell you thedirection of my suspicions, however much the result mayhave shown that they were unfounded.  But whatever the true explanation of Barrymore'smovements might be, I felt that the responsibility ofkeeping them to myself until I could explain them was          
more than I could bear. I had an interview with thebaronet in his study after breakfast, and I told him all that Ihad seen. He was less surprised than I had expected. `I knew that Barrymore walked about nights, and I hada mind to speak to him about it,' said he. `Two or threetimes I have heard his steps in the passage, coming andgoing, just about the hour you name.' `Perhaps then he pays a visit every night to thatparticular window,' I suggested. `Perhaps he does. If so, we should be able to shadowhim, and see what it is that he is after. I wonder what yourfriend Holmes would do, if he were here.' `I believe that he would do exactly what you nowsuggest,' said I. `He would follow Barrymore and see whathe did.' `Then we shall do it together.' `But surely he would hear us.' `The man is rather deaf, and in any case we must takeour chance of that. We'll sit up in my room to-night andwait until he passes.' Sir Henry rubbed his hands withpleasure, and it was evident that he hailed the adventure asa relief to his somewhat quiet life upon the moor. The baronet has been in communication with thearchitect who prepared the plans for Sir Charles, and with          
a contractor from London, so that we may expect greatchanges to begin here soon. There have been decoratorsand furnishers up from Plymouth, and it is evident thatour friend has large ideas, and means to spare no pains orexpense to restore the grandeur of his family. When thehouse is renovated and refurnished, all that he will needwill be a wife to make it complete. Between ourselvesthere are pretty clear signs that this will not be wanting ifthe lady is willing, for I have seldom seen a man moreinfatuated with a woman than he is with our beautifulneighbour, Miss Stapleton. And yet the course of true lovedoes not run quite as smoothly as one would under thecircumstances expect. To-day, for example, its surface wasbroken by a very unexpected ripple, which has caused ourfriend considerable perplexity and annoyance. After the conversation which I have quoted aboutBarrymore, Sir Henry put on his hat and prepared to goout. As a matter of course I did the same. `What, are you coming, Watson?' he asked, looking atme in a curious way. `That depends on whether you are going on the moor,'said I. `Yes, I am.'          
 `Well, you know what my instructions are. I am sorryto intrude, but you heard how earnestly Holmes insistedthat I should not leave you, and especially that you shouldnot go alone upon the moor.' Sir Henry put his hand upon my shoulder with apleasant smile. `My dear fellow,' said he, `Holmes, with all hiswisdom, did not foresee some things which havehappened since I have been on the moor. You understandme? I am sure that you are the last man in the world whowould wish to be a spoil-sport. I must go out alone.' It put me in a most awkward position. I was at a losswhat to say or what to do, and before I had made up mymind he picked up his cane and was gone. But when I came to think the matter over myconscience reproached me bitterly for having on anypretext allowed him to go out of my sight. I imaginedwhat my feelings would be if I had to return to you and toconfess that some misfortune had occurred through mydisregard for your instructions. I assure you my cheeksflushed at the very thought. It might not even now be toolate to overtake him, so I set off at once in the direction ofMerripit House.          
 I hurried along the road at the top of my speed withoutseeing anything of Sir Henry, until I came to the pointwhere the moor path branches off. There, fearing thatperhaps I had come in the wrong direction after all, Imounted a hill from which I could command a view--thesame hill which is cut into the dark quarry. Thence I sawhim at once. He was on the moor path, about a quarter ofa mile off, and a lady was by his side who could only beMiss Stapleton. It was clear that there was already anunderstanding between them and that they had met byappointment. They were walking slowly along in deepconversation, and I saw her making quick littlemovements of her hands as if she were very earnest inwhat she was saying, while he listened intently, and onceor twice shook his head in strong dissent. I stood amongthe rocks watching them, very much puzzled as to what Ishould do next. To follow them and break into theirintimate conversation seemed to be an outrage, and yetmy clear duty was never for an instant to let him out ofmy sight. To act the spy upon a friend was a hateful task.Still, I could see no better course than to observe himfrom the hill, and to clear my conscience by confessing tohim afterwards what I had done. It is true that if anysudden danger had threatened him I was too far away to          
be of use, and yet I am sure that you will agree with methat the position was very difficult, and that there wasnothing more which I could do. Our friend, Sir Henry, and the lady had halted on thepath and were standing deeply absorbed in theirconversation, when I was suddenly aware that I was notthe only witness of their interview. A wisp of greenfloating in the air caught my eye, and another glanceshowed me that it was carried on a stick by a man whowas moving among the broken ground. It was Stapletonwith his butterfly-net. He was very much closer to thepair than I was, and he appeared to be moving in theirdirection. At this instant Sir Henry suddenly drew MissStapleton to his side. His arm was round her, but itseemed to me that she was straining away from him withher face averted. He stooped his head to hers, and sheraised one hand as if in protest. Next moment I saw themspring apart and turn hurriedly round. Stapleton was thecause of the interruption. He was running wildly towardsthem, his absurd net dangling behind him. He gesticulatedand almost danced with excitement in front of the lovers.What the scene meant I could not imagine, but it seemedto me that Stapleton was abusing Sir Henry, who offeredexplanations, which became more angry as the other          
refused to accept them. The lady stood by in haughtysilence. Finally Stapleton turned upon his heel andbeckoned in a peremptory way to his sister, who, after anirresolute glance at Sir Henry, walked off by the side ofher brother. The naturalist's angry gestures showed thatthe lady was included in his displeasure. The baronet stoodfor a minute looking after them, and then he walkedslowly back the way that he had come, his head hanging,the very picture of dejection. What all this meant I could not imagine, but I wasdeeply ashamed to have witnessed so intimate a scenewithout my friend's knowledge. I ran down the hilltherefore and met the baronet at the bottom. His face wasflushed with anger and his brows were wrinkled, like onewho is at his wit's ends what to do. `Halloa, Watson! Where have you dropped from?' saidhe. `You don't mean to say that you came after me in spiteof all?' I explained everything to him: how I had found itimpossible to remain behind, how I had followed him,and how I had witnessed all that had occurred. For aninstant his eyes blazed at me, but my frankness disarmedhis anger, and he broke at last into a rather rueful laugh.          
 `You would have thought the middle of that prairie afairly safe place for a man to be private,' said he, `but, bythunder, the whole country-side seems to have been outto see me do my wooing--and a mighty poor wooing atthat! Where had you engaged a seat?' `I was on that hill.' `Quite in the back row, eh? But her brother was wellup to the front. Did you see him come out on us?' `Yes, I did.' `Did he ever strike you as being crazy--this brother ofhers?' `I can't say that he ever did.' `I dare say not. I always thought him sane enough untilto-day, but you can take it from me that either he or Iought to be in a strait-jacket. What's the matter with me,anyhow? You've lived near me for some weeks, Watson.Tell me straight, now! Is there anything that wouldprevent me from making a good husband to a woman thatI loved?' `I should say not.' `He can't object to my worldly position, so it must bemyself that he has this down on. What has he against me?I never hurt man or woman in my life that I know of.          
And yet he would not so much as let me touch the tips ofher fingers.' `Did he say so?' `That, and a deal more. I tell you, Watson, I've onlyknown her these few weeks, but from the first I just feltthat she was made for me, and she, too--she was happywhen she was with me, and that I'll swear. There's a lightin a woman's eyes that speaks louder than words. But hehas never let us get together, and it was only to-day forthe first time that I saw a chance of having a few wordswith her alone. She was glad to meet me, but when shedid it was not love that she would talk about, and shewouldn't have let me talk about it either if she could havestopped it. She kept coming back to it that this was a placeof danger, and that she would never be happy until I hadleft it. I told her that since I had seen her I was in no hurryto leave it, and that if she really wanted me to go, the onlyway to work it was for her to arrange to go with me.With that I offered in as many words to marry her, butbefore she could answer, down came this brother of hers,running at us with a face on him like a madman. He wasjust white with rage, and those light eyes of his wereblazing with fury. What was I doing with the lady? Howdared I offer her attentions which were distasteful to her?Did I think that because I was a baronet I could do what Iliked? If he had not been her brother I should have knownbetter how to answer him. As it was I told him that myfeelings towards his sister were such as I was not ashamedof, and that I hoped that she might honour me bybecoming my wife. That seemed to make the matter nobetter, so then I lost my temper too, and I answered himrather more hotly than I should perhaps, considering thatshe was standing by. So it ended by his going off with her,as you saw, and here am I as badly puzzled a man as any inthis county. Just tell me what it all means, Watson, and I'llowe you more than ever I can hope to pay.' I tried one or two explanations, but, indeed, I wascompletely puzzled myself. Our friend's title, his fortune,his age, his character, and his appearance are all in hisfavour, and I know nothing against him unless it be thisdark fate which runs in his family. That his advancesshould be rejected so brusquely without any reference tothe lady's own wishes, and that the lady should accept thesituation without protest, is very amazing. However, ourconjectures were set at rest by a visit from Stapletonhimself that very afternoon. He had come to offerapologies for his rudeness of the morning, and after a longprivate interview with Sir Henry in his study, the upshot          
of their conversation was that the breach is quite healed,and that we are to dine at Merripit House next Friday as asign of it. `I don't say now that he isn't a crazy man,' said SirHenry; `I can't forget the look in his eyes when he ran atme this morning, but I must allow that no man couldmake a more handsome apology than he has done.' `Did he give any explanation of his conduct?' `His sister is everything in his life, he says. That isnatural enough, and I am glad that he should understandher value. They have always been together, and accordingto his account he has been a very lonely man with onlyher as a companion, so that the thought of losing her wasreally terrible to him. He had not understood, he said, thatI was becoming attached to her, but when he saw with hisown eyes that it was really so, and that she might be takenaway from him, it gave him such a shock that for a timehe was not responsible for what he said or did. He wasvery sorry for all that had passed, and he recognized howfoolish and how selfish it was that he should imagine thathe could hold a beautiful woman like his sister to himselffor her whole life. If she had to leave him he had rather itwas to a neighbour like myself than to anyone else. But inany case it was a blow to him, and it would take him some          
time before he could prepare himself to meet it. He wouldwithdraw all opposition upon his part if I would promisefor three months to let the matter rest and to be contentwith cultivating the lady's friendship during that timewithout claiming her love. This I promised, and so thematter rests.' So there is one of our small mysteries cleared up. It issomething to have touched bottom anywhere in this bogin which we are floundering. We know now whyStapleton looked with disfavour upon his sister's suitor--even when that suitor was so eligible a one as Sir Henry.And now I pass on to another thread which I haveextricated out of the tangled skein, the mystery of the sobsin the night, of the tear-stained face of Mrs. Barrymore, ofthe secret journey of the butler to the western latticewindow. Congratulate me, my dear Holmes, and tell methat I have not disappointed you as an agent--that you donot regret the confidence which you showed in me whenyou sent me down. All these things have by one night'swork been thoroughly cleared. I have said `by one night's work,' but, in truth, it wasby two nights' work, for on the first we drew entirelyblank. I sat up with Sir Henry in his rooms until nearlythree o'clock in the morning, but no sound of any sort did          
we hear except the chiming clock upon the stairs. It was amost melancholy vigil, and ended by each of us fallingasleep in our chairs. Fortunately we were not discouraged,and we determined to try again. The next night welowered the lamp, and sat smoking cigarettes withoutmaking the least sound. It was incredible how slowly thehours crawled by, and yet we were helped through it bythe same sort of patient interest which the hunter mustfeel as he watches the trap into which he hopes the gamemay wander. One struck, and two, and we had almost forthe second time given it up in despair, when in an instantwe both sat bolt upright in our chairs, with all our wearysenses keenly on the alert once more. We had heard thecreak of a step in the passage. Very stealthily we heard it pass along until it died awayin the distance. Then the baronet gently opened his doorand we set out in pursuit. Already our man had goneround the gallery, and the corridor was all in darkness.Softly we stole along until we had come into the otherwing. We were just in time to catch a glimpse of the tall,black-bearded figure, his shoulders rounded, as he tip-toeddown the passage. Then he passed through the same dooras before, and the light of the candle framed it in thedarkness and shot one single yellow beam across the          
gloom of the corridor. We shuffled cautiously towards it,trying every plank before we dared to put our wholeweight upon it. We had taken the precaution of leavingour boots behind us, but, even so, the old boards snappedand creaked beneath our tread. Sometimes it seemedimpossible that he should fail to hear our approach.However, the man is fortunately rather deaf, and he wasentirely preoccupied in that which he was doing. When atlast we reached the door and peeped through we foundhim crouching at the window, candle in hand, his white,intent face pressed against the pane, exactly as I had seenhim two nights before. We had arranged no plan of campaign, but the baronetis a man to whom the most direct way is always the mostnatural. He walked into the room, and as he did soBarrymore sprang up from the window with a sharp hissof his breath and stood, livid and trembling, before us. Hisdark eyes, glaring out of the white mask of his face, werefull of horror and astonishment as he gazed from Sir Henryto me. `What are you doing here, Barrymore?' `Nothing, sir.' His agitation was so great that he couldhardly speak, and the shadows sprang up and down from          
the shaking of his candle. `It was the window, sir. I goround at night to see that they are fastened.' `On the second floor?' `Yes, sir, all the windows.' `Look here, Barrymore,' said Sir Henry, sternly; `wehave made up our minds to have the truth out of you, soit will save you trouble to tell it sooner rather than later.Come, now! No lies! What were you doing at thatwindow?' The fellow looked at us in a helpless way, and hewrung his hands together like one who is in the lastextremity of doubt and misery. `I was doing no harm, sir. I was holding a candle to thewindow.' `And why were you holding a candle to the window?' `Don't ask me, Sir Henry--don't ask me! I give youmy word, sir, that it is not my secret, and that I cannot tellit. If it concerned no one but myself I would not try tokeep it from you.' A sudden idea occurred to me, and I took the candlefrom the trembling hand of the butler. `He must have been holding it as a signal,' said I. `Letus see if there is any answer.' I held it as he had done, andstared out into the darkness of the night. Vaguely I could          
discern the black bank of the trees and the lighter expanseof the moor, for the moon was behind the clouds. Andthen I gave a cry of exultation, for a tiny pin-point ofyellow light had suddenly transfixed the dark veil, andglowed steadily in the centre of the black square framed bythe window. `There it is!' I cried. `No, no, sir, it is nothing--nothing at all!' the butlerbroke in; `I assure you, sir ----` `Move your light across the window, Watson!' criedthe baronet. `See, the other moves also! Now, you rascal,do you deny that it is a signal? Come, speak up! Who isyour confederate out yonder, and what is this conspiracythat is going on?' The man's face became openly defiant. `It is my business, and not yours. I will not tell.' `Then you leave my employment right away.' `Very good, sir. If I must I must.' `And you go in disgrace. By thunder, you may well beashamed of yourself. Your family has lived with mine forover a hundred years under this roof, and here I find youdeep in some dark plot against me.' `No, no, sir; no, not against you!' It was a woman'svoice, and Mrs. Barrymore, paler and more horror-struck          
than her husband, was standing at the door. Her bulkyfigure in a shawl and skirt might have been comic were itnot for the intensity of feeling upon her face. `We have to go, Eliza. This is the end of it. You canpack our things,' said the butler. `Oh, John, John, have I brought you to this? It is mydoing, Sir Henry--all mine. He has done nothing exceptfor my sake and because I asked him.' `Speak out, then! What does it mean?' `My unhappy brother is starving on the moor. Wecannot let him perish at our very gates. The light is asignal to him that food is ready for him, and his light outyonder is to show the spot to which to bring it.' `Then your brother is --` `The escaped convict, sir--Selden, the criminal.' `That's the truth, sir,' said Barrymore. `I said that it wasnot my secret and that I could not tell it to you. But nowyou have heard it, and you will see that if there was a plotit was not against you.' This, then, was the explanation of the stealthyexpeditions at night and the light at the window. SirHenry and I both stared at the woman in amazement. Wasit possible that this stolidly respectable person was of the          
same blood as one of the most notorious criminals in thecountry? `Yes, sir, my name was Selden, and he is my youngerbrother. We humoured him too much when he was a lad,and gave him his own way in everything until he came tothink that the world was made for his pleasure, and that hecould do what he liked in it. Then as he grew older hemet wicked companions, and the devil entered into himuntil he broke my mother's heart and dragged our name inthe dirt. From crime to crime he sank lower and lower,until it is only the mercy of God which has snatched himfrom the scaffold; but to me, sir, he was always the littlecurly-headed boy that I had nursed and played with, as anelder sister would. That was why he broke prison, sir. Heknew that I was here and that we could not refuse to helphim. When he dragged himself here one night, weary andstarving, with the warders hard at his heels, what could wedo? We took him in and fed him and cared for him. Thenyou returned, sir, and my brother thought he would besafer on the moor than anywhere else until the hue andcry was over, so he lay in hiding there. But every secondnight we made sure if he was still there by putting a lightin the window, and if there was an answer my husbandtook out some bread and meat to him. Every day we          
hoped that he was gone, but as long as he was there wecould not desert him. That is the whole truth, as I am anhonest Christian woman, and you will see that if there isblame in the matter it does not lie with my husband, butwith me, for whose sake he has done all that he has.' The woman's words came with an intense earnestnesswhich carried conviction with them. `Is this true, Barrymore?' `Yes, Sir Henry. Every word of it.' `Well, I cannot blame you for standing by your ownwife. Forget what I have said. Go to your room, you two,and we shall talk further about this matter in the morning.' When they were gone we looked out of the windowagain. Sir Henry had flung it open, and the cold nightwind beat in upon our faces. Far away in the blackdistance there still glowed that one tiny point of yellowlight. `I wonder he dares,' said Sir Henry. `It may be so placed as to be only visible from here.' `Very likely. How far do you think it is?' `Out by the Cleft Tor, I think.' `Not more than a mile or two off.' `Hardly that.'          
 `Well, it cannot be far if Barrymore had to carry outthe food to it. And he is waiting, this villain, beside thatcandle. By thunder, Watson, I am going out to take thatman!' The same thought had crossed my own mind. It wasnot as if the Barrymores had taken us into theirconfidence. Their secret had been forced from them. Theman was a danger to the community, an unmitigatedscoundrel for whom there was neither pity nor excuse.We were only doing our duty in taking this chance ofputting him back where he could do no harm. With hisbrutal and violent nature, others would have to pay theprice if we held our hands. Any night, for example, ourneighbours the Stapletons might be attacked by him, andit may have been the thought of this which made SirHenry so keen upon the adventure. `I will come,' said I. `Then get your revolver and put on your boots. Thesooner we start the better, as the fellow may put out hislight and be off.' In five minutes we were outside the door, startingupon our expedition. We hurried through the darkshrubbery, amid the dull moaning of the autumn wind andthe rustle of the falling leaves. The night air was heavy          
with the smell of damp and decay. Now and again themoon peeped out for an instant, but clouds were drivingover the face of the sky, and just as we came out on themoor a thin rain began to fall. The light still burnedsteadily in front. `Are you armed?' I asked. `I have a hunting-crop.' `We must close in on him rapidly, for he is said to be adesperate fellow. We shall take him by surprise and havehim at our mercy before he can resist.' `I say, Watson,' said the baronet, `what would Holmessay to this? How about that hour of darkness in which thepower of evil is exalted?' As if in answer to his words there rose suddenly out ofthe vast gloom of the moor that strange cry which I hadalready heard upon the borders of the great GrimpenMire. It came with the wind through the silence of thenight, a long, deep mutter, then a rising howl, and thenthe sad moan in which it died away. Again and again itsounded, the whole air throbbing with it, strident, wild,and menacing. The baronet caught my sleeve and his faceglimmered white through the darkness. `My God, what's that, Watson?'          
 `I don't know. It's a sound they have on the moor. Iheard it once before.' It died away, and an absolute silence closed in upon us.We stood straining our ears, but nothing came. `Watson,' said the baronet, `it was the cry of a hound.' My blood ran cold in my veins, for there was a break inhis voice which told of the sudden horror which hadseized him. `What do they call this sound?' he asked. `Who?' `The folk on the country-side.' `Oh, they are ignorant people. Why should you mindwhat they call it?' `Tell me, Watson. What do they say of it?' I hesitated but could not escape the question. `They say it is the cry of the Hound of theBaskervilles.' He groaned and was silent for a few moments. `A hound it was,' he said, at last, `but it seemed tocome from miles away, over yonder, I think.' `It was hard to say whence it came.' `It rose and fell with the wind. Isn't that the directionof the great Grimpen Mire?' `Yes, it is.'          
  `Well, it was up there. Come now, Watson, didn't youthink yourself that it was the cry of a hound? I am not achild. You need not fear to speak the truth.'  `Stapleton was with me when I heard it last. He saidthat it might be the calling of a strange bird.'  `No, no, it was a hound. My God, can there be sometruth in all these stories? Is it possible that I am really indanger from so dark a cause? You don't believe it, do you,Watson?'  `No, no.'  `And yet it was one thing to laugh about it in London,and it is another to stand out here in the darkness of themoor and to hear such a cry as that. And my uncle! Therewas the footprint of the hound beside him as he lay. It allfits together. I don't think that I am a coward, Watson,but that sound seemed to freeze my very blood. Feel myhand!'  It was as cold as a block of marble.  `You'll be all right to-morrow.'  `I don't think I'll get that cry out of my head. What doyou advise that we do now?'  `Shall we turn back?'  `No, by thunder; we have come out to get our man,and we will do it. We after the convict, and a hell-hound,          
as likely as not, after us. Come on! We'll see it through ifall the fiends of the pit were loose upon the moor.'  We stumbled slowly along in the darkness, with theblack loom of the craggy hills around us, and the yellowspeck of light burning steadily in front. There is nothingso deceptive as the distance of a light upon a pitch-darknight, and sometimes the glimmer seemed to be far awayupon the horizon and sometimes it might have beenwithin a few yards of us. But at last we could see whenceit came, and then we knew that we were indeed veryclose. A guttering candle was stuck in a crevice of therocks which flanked it on each side so as to keep the windfrom it and also to prevent it from being visible, save inthe direction of Baskerville Hall. A boulder of graniteconcealed our approach, and crouching behind it wegazed over it at the signal light. It was strange to see thissingle candle burning there in the middle of the moor,with no sign of life near it--just the one straight yellowflame and the gleam of the rock on each side of it.  `What shall we do now?' whispered Sir Henry.  `Wait here. He must be near his light. Let us see if wecan get a glimpse of him.'  The words were hardly out of my mouth when weboth saw him. Over the rocks, in the crevice of which the          
candle burned, there was thrust out an evil yellow face, aterrible animal face, all seamed and scored with vilepassions. Foul with mire, with a bristling beard, and hungwith matted hair, it might well have belonged to one ofthose old savages who dwelt in the burrows on thehillsides. The light beneath him was reflected in his small,cunning eyes which peered fiercely to right and leftthrough the darkness, like a crafty and savage animal whohas heard the steps of the hunters. Something had evidently aroused his suspicions. It mayhave been that Barrymore had some private signal whichwe had neglected to give, or the fellow may have hadsome other reason for thinking that all was not well, but Icould read his fears upon his wicked face. Any instant hemight dash out the light and vanish in the darkness. Isprang forward therefore, and Sir Henry did the same. Atthe same moment the convict screamed out a curse at usand hurled a rock which splintered up against the boulderwhich had sheltered us. I caught one glimpse of his short,squat, strongly- built figure as he sprang to his feet andturned to run. At the same moment by a lucky chance themoon broke through the clouds. We rushed over thebrow of the hill, and there was our man running withgreat speed down the other side, springing over the stones          
in his way with the activity of a mountain goat. A luckylong shot of my revolver might have crippled him, but Ihad brought it only to defend myself if attacked, and notto shoot an unarmed man who was running away. We were both swift runners and in fairly good training,but we soon found that we had no chance of overtakinghim. We saw him for a long time in the moonlight untilhe was only a small speck moving swiftly among theboulders upon the side of a distant hill. We ran and ranuntil we were completely blown, but the space betweenus grew ever wider. Finally we stopped and sat panting ontwo rocks, while we watched him disappearing in thedistance. And it was at this moment that there occurred a moststrange and unexpected thing. We had risen from ourrocks and were turning to go home, having abandoned thehopeless chase. The moon was low upon the right, andthe jagged pinnacle of a granite tor stood up against thelower curve of its silver disc. There, outlined as black as anebony statue on that shining back-ground, I saw the figureof a man upon the tor. Do not think that it was a delusion,Holmes. I assure you that I have never in my life seenanything more clearly. As far as I could judge, the figurewas that of a tall, thin man. He stood with his legs a little          
separated, his arms folded, his head bowed, as if he werebrooding over that enormous wilderness of peat andgranite which lay before him. He might have been thevery spirit of that terrible place. It was not the convict.This man was far from the place where the latter haddisappeared. Besides, he was a much taller man. With a cryof surprise I pointed him out to the baronet, but in theinstant during which I had turned to grasp his arm theman was gone. There was the sharp pinnacle of granitestill cutting the lower edge of the moon, but its peak boreno trace of that silent and motionless figure.  I wished to go in that direction and to search the tor,but it was some distance away. The baronet's nerves werestill quivering from that cry, which recalled the dark storyof his family, and he was not in the mood for freshadventures. He had not seen this lonely man upon the torand could not feel the thrill which his strange presence andhis commanding attitude had given to me. `A warder, nodoubt,' said he. `The moor has been thick with them sincethis fellow escaped.' Well, perhaps his explanation may bethe right one, but I should like to have some further proofof it. To-day we mean to communicate to the Princetownpeople where they should look for their missing man, butit is hard lines that we have not actually had the triumph          
of bringing him back as our own prisoner. Such are theadventures of last night, and you must acknowledge, mydear Holmes, that I have done you very well in the matterof a report. Much of what I tell you is no doubt quiteirrelevant, but still I feel that it is best that I should let youhave all the facts and leave you to select for yourself thosewhich will be of most service to you in helping you toyour conclusions. We are certainly making some progress.So far as the Barrymores go we have found the motive oftheir actions, and that has cleared up the situation verymuch. But the moor with its mysteries and its strangeinhabitants remains as inscrutable as ever. Perhaps in mynext I may be able to throw some light upon this also.Best of all would it be if you could come down to us. Inany case you will hear from me again in the course of thenext few days.        
  Extract from the Diary of Dr. Watson So far I have been able to quote from the reports whichI have forwarded during these early days to SherlockHolmes. Now, however, I have arrived at a point in mynarrative where I am compelled to abandon this methodand to trust once more to my recollections, aided by thediary which I kept at the time. A few extracts from thelatter will carry me on to those scenes which are indeliblyfixed in every detail upon my memory. I proceed, then,from the morning which followed our abortive chase ofthe convict and our other strange experiences upon themoor. OCTOBER 16TH.--A dull and foggy day with adrizzle of rain. The house is banked in with rolling clouds,which rise now and then to show the dreary curves of themoor, with thin, silver veins upon the sides of the hills,and the distant boulders gleaming where the light strikesupon their wet faces. It is melancholy outside and in. Thebaronet is in a black reaction after the excitements of thenight. I am conscious myself of a weight at my heart and a          
feeling of impending danger--ever present danger, whichis the more terrible because I am unable to define it.  And have I not cause for such a feeling? Consider thelong sequence of incidents which have all pointed to somesinister influence which is at work around us. There is thedeath of the last occupant of the Hall, fulfilling so exactlythe conditions of the family legend, and there are therepeated reports from peasants of the appearance of astrange creature upon the moor. Twice I have with myown ears heard the sound which resembled the distantbaying of a hound. It is incredible, impossible, that itshould really be outside the ordinary laws of nature. Aspectral hound which leaves material footmarks and fillsthe air with its howling is surely not to be thought of.Stapleton may fall in with such a superstition, andMortimer also; but if I have one quality upon earth it iscommon-sense, and nothing will persuade me to believein such a thing. To do so would be to descend to the levelof these poor peasants, who are not content with a merefiend dog but must needs describe him with hell-fireshooting from his mouth and eyes. Holmes would notlisten to such fancies, and I am his agent. But facts arefacts, and I have twice heard this crying upon the moor.Suppose that there were really some huge hound loose          
upon it; that would go far to explain everything. Butwhere could such a hound lie concealed, where did it getits food, where did it come from, how was it that no onesaw it by day? It must be confessed that the naturalexplanation offers almost as many difficulties as the other.And always, apart from the hound, there is the fact of thehuman agency in London, the man in the cab, and theletter which warned Sir Henry against the moor. This atleast was real, but it might have been the work of aprotecting friend as easily as of an enemy. Where is thatfriend or enemy now? Has he remained in London, or hashe followed us down here? Could he--could he be thestranger whom I saw upon the tor?  It is true that I have had only the one glance at him,and yet there are some things to which I am ready toswear. He is no one whom I have seen down here, and Ihave now met all the neighbours. The figure was far tallerthan that of Stapleton, far thinner than that of Frankland.Barrymore it might possibly have been, but we had lefthim behind us, and I am certain that he could not havefollowed us. A stranger then is still dogging us, just as astranger dogged us in London. We have never shaken himoff. If I could lay my hands upon that man, then at last we          
might find ourselves at the end of all our difficulties. Tothis one purpose I must now devote all my energies. My first impulse was to tell Sir Henry all my plans. Mysecond and wisest one is to play my own game and speakas little as possible to anyone. He is silent and distrait. Hisnerves have been strangely shaken by that sound upon themoor. I will say nothing to add to his anxieties, but I willtake my own steps to attain my own end. We had a small scene this morning after breakfast.Barrymore asked leave to speak with Sir Henry, and theywere closeted in his study some little time. Sitting in thebilliard-room I more than once heard the sound of voicesraised, and I had a pretty good idea what the point waswhich was under discussion. After a time the baronetopened his door and called for me. `Barrymore considers that he has a grievance,' he said.`He thinks that it was unfair on our part to hunt hisbrother-in-law down when he, of his own free will, hadtold us the secret.' The butler was standing very pale but very collectedbefore us. `I may have spoken too warmly, sir,' said he, `and if Ihave, I am sure that I beg your pardon. At the same time,I was very much surprised when I heard you two          
gentlemen come back this morning and learned that youhad been chasing Selden. The poor fellow has enough tofight against without my putting more upon his track.'  `If you had told us of your own free will it would havebeen a different thing,' said the baronet, `you only told us,or rather your wife only told us, when it was forced fromyou and you could not help yourself.'  `I didn't think you would have taken advantage of it,Sir Henry--indeed I didn't.'  `The man is a public danger. There are lonely housesscattered over the moor, and he is a fellow who wouldstick at nothing. You only want to get a glimpse of hisface to see that. Look at Mr. Stapleton's house, forexample, with no one but himself to defend it. There's nosafety for anyone until he is under lock and key.'  `He'll break into no house, sir. I give you my solemnword upon that. But he will never trouble anyone in thiscountry again. I assure you, Sir Henry, that in a very fewdays the necessary arrangements will have been made andhe will be on his way to South America. For God's sake,sir, I beg of you not to let the police know that he is stillon the moor. They have given up the chase there, and hecan lie quiet until the ship is ready for him. You can't tell          
on him without getting my wife and me into trouble. Ibeg you, sir, to say nothing to the police.' `What do you say, Watson?' I shrugged my shoulders. `If he were safely out of thecountry it would relieve the tax-payer of a burden.' `But how about the chance of his holding someone upbefore he goes?' `He would not do anything so mad, sir. We haveprovided him with all that he can want. To commit acrime would be to show where he was hiding.' `That is true,' said Sir Henry. `Well, Barrymore --` `God bless you, sir, and thank you from my heart! Itwould have killed my poor wife had he been taken again.' `I guess we are aiding and abetting a felony, Watson?But, after what we have heard I don't feel as if I couldgive the man up, so there is an end of it. All right,Barrymore, you can go.' With a few broken words of gratitude the man turned,but he hesitated and then came back. `You've been so kind to us, sir, that I should like to dothe best I can for you in return. I know something, SirHenry, and perhaps I should have said it before, but it waslong after the inquest that I found it out. I've never          
breathed a word about it yet to mortal man. It's aboutpoor Sir Charles's death.' The baronet and I were both upon our feet. `Do youknow how he died?' `No, sir, I don't know that.' `What then?' `I know why he was at the gate at that hour. It was tomeet a woman.' `To meet a woman! He?' `Yes, sir.' `And the woman's name?' `I can't give you the name, sir, but I can give you theinitials. Her initials were L. L.' `How do you know this, Barrymore?' `Well, Sir Henry, your uncle had a letter that morning.He had usually a great many letters, for he was a publicman and well known for his kind heart, so that everyonewho was in trouble was glad to turn to him. But thatmorning, as it chanced, there was only this one letter, so Itook the more notice of it. It was from Coombe Tracey,and it was addressed in a woman's hand.' `Well?' `Well, sir, I thought no more of the matter, and neverwould have done had it not been for my wife. Only a few          
weeks ago she was cleaning out Sir Charles's study--it hadnever been touched since his death--and she found theashes of a burned letter in the back of the grate. Thegreater part of it was charred to pieces, but one little slip,the end of a page, hung together, and the writing couldstill be read, though it was gray on a black ground. Itseemed to us to be a postscript at the end of the letter, andit said: `Please, please, as you are a gentleman, burn thisletter, and be at the gate by ten o clock. Beneath it weresigned the initials L. L.'  `Have you got that slip?'  `No, sir, it crumbled all to bits after we moved it.'  `Had Sir Charles received any other letters in the samewriting?'  `Well, sir, I took no particular notice of his letters. Ishould not have noticed this one, only it happened tocome alone.'  `And you have no idea who L. L. is?'  `No, sir. No more than you have. But I expect if wecould lay our hands upon that lady we should know moreabout Sir Charles's death.'  `I cannot understand, Barrymore, how you came toconceal this important information.'          
 `Well, sir, it was immediately after that our own troublecame to us. And then again, sir, we were both of us veryfond of Sir Charles, as we well might be considering allthat he has done for us. To rake this up couldn't help ourpoor master, and it's well to go carefully when there's alady in the case. Even the best of us ----` `You thought it might injure his reputation?' `Well, sir, I thought no good could come of it. Butnow you have been kind to us, and I feel as if it would betreating you unfairly not to tell you all that I know aboutthe matter.' `Very good, Barrymore; you can go.' When the butlerhad left us Sir Henry turned to me. `Well, Watson, whatdo you think of this new light?' `It seems to leave the darkness rather blacker thanbefore.' `So I think. But if we can only trace L. L. it shouldclear up the whole business. We have gained that much.We know that there is someone who has the facts if wecan only find her. What do you think we should do?' `Let Holmes know all about it at once. It will give himthe clue for which he has been seeking. I am muchmistaken if it does not bring him down.'          
 I went at once to my room and drew up my report ofthe morning's conversation for Holmes. It was evident tome that he had been very busy of late, for the notes whichI had from Baker Street were few and short, with nocomments upon the information which I had supplied andhardly any reference to my mission. No doubt hisblackmailing case is absorbing all his faculties. And yet thisnew factor must surely arrest his attention and renew hisinterest. I wish that he were here. OCTOBER 17TH.--All day to-day the rain poureddown, rustling on the ivy and dripping from the eaves. Ithought of the convict out upon the bleak, cold, shelterlessmoor. Poor devil! Whatever his crimes, he has sufferedsomething to atone for them. And then I thought of thatother one--the face in the cab, the figure against themoon. Was he also out in that deluged--the unseenwatcher, the man of darkness? In the evening I put on mywaterproof and I walked far upon the sodden moor, full ofdark imaginings, the rain beating upon my face and thewind whistling about my ears. God help those whowander into the great mire now, for even the firm uplandsare becoming a morass. I found the black tor upon whichI had seen the solitary watcher, and from its craggysummit I looked out myself across the melancholy downs.          
Rain squalls drifted across their russet face, and the heavy,slate-coloured clouds hung low over the landscape, trailingin gray wreaths down the sides of the fantastic hills. In thedistant hollow on the left, half hidden by the mist, the twothin towers of Baskerville Hall rose above the trees. Theywere the only signs of human life which I could see, saveonly those prehistoric huts which lay thickly upon theslopes of the hills. Nowhere was there any trace of thatlonely man whom I had seen on the same spot two nightsbefore. As I walked back I was overtaken by Dr. Mortimerdriving in his dog-cart over a rough moorland track whichled from the outlying farmhouse of Foulmire. He has beenvery attentive to us, and hardly a day has passed that he hasnot called at the Hall to see how we were getting on. Heinsisted upon my climbing into his dog-cart, and he gaveme a lift homeward. I found him much troubled over thedisappearance of his little spaniel. It had wandered on tothe moor and had never come back. I gave him suchconsolation as I might, but I thought of the pony on theGrimpen Mire, and I do not fancy that he will see his littledog again.          
 `By the way, Mortimer,' said I as we jolted along therough road, `I suppose there are few people living withindriving distance of this whom you do not know?' `Hardly any, I think.' `Can you, then, tell me the name of any woman whoseinitials are L. L.?' He thought for a few minutes. `No,' said he. `There are a few gipsies and labouringfolk for whom I can't answer, but among the farmers orgentry there is no one whose initials are those. Wait a bitthough,' he added after a pause. `There is Laura Lyons--her initials are L. L.--but she lives in Coombe Tracey.' `Who is she?' I asked. `She is Frankland's daughter.' `What! Old Frankland the crank?' `Exactly. She married an artist named Lyons, who camesketching on the moor. He proved to be a blackguard anddeserted her. The fault from what I hear may not havebeen entirely on one side. Her father refused to haveanything to do with her because she had married withouthis consent, and perhaps for one or two other reasons aswell. So, between the old sinner and the young one thegirl has had a pretty bad time.' `How does she live?'          
 `I fancy old Frankland allows her a pittance, but itcannot be more, for his own affairs are considerablyinvolved. Whatever she may have deserved one could notallow her to go hopelessly to the bad. Her story got about,and several of the people here did something to enable herto earn an honest living. Stapleton did for one, and SirCharles for another. I gave a trifle myself. It was to set herup in a typewriting business.' He wanted to know the object of my inquiries, but Imanaged to satisfy his curiosity without telling him toomuch, for there is no reason why we should take anyoneinto our confidence. To-morrow morning I shall find myway to Coombe Tracey, and if I can see this Mrs. LauraLyons, of equivocal reputation, a long step will have beenmade towards clearing one incident in this chain ofmysteries. I am certainly developing the wisdom of theserpent, for when Mortimer pressed his questions to aninconvenient extent I asked him casually to what typeFrankland's skull belonged, and so heard nothing butcraniology for the rest of our drive. I have not lived foryears with Sherlock Holmes for nothing. I have only one other incident to record upon thistempestuous   and  melancholy  day. This was   my          
conversation with Barrymore just now, which gives meone more strong card which I can play in due time. Mortimer had stayed to dinner, and he and the baronetplayed ecart, afterwards. The butler brought me my coffeeinto the library, and I took the chance to ask him a fewquestions. `Well,' said I, `has this precious relation of yoursdeparted, or is he still lurking out yonder?' `I don't know, sir. I hope to heaven that he has gone,for he has brought nothing but trouble here! I've notheard of him since I left out food for him last, and that wasthree days ago.' `Did you see him then?' `No, sir, but the food was gone when next I went thatway.' `Then he was certainly there?' `So you would think, sir, unless it was the other manwho took it.' I sat with my coffee-cup halfway to my lips and staredat Barrymore. `You know that there is another man then?' `Yes, sir; there is another man upon the moor.' `Have you seen him?' `No, sir.'          
  `How do you know of him then?'  `Selden told me of him, sir, a week ago or more. He'sin hiding, too, but he's not a convict as far as I can makeout. I don't like it, Dr. Watson--I tell you straight, sir,that I don't like it.' He spoke with a sudden passion ofearnestness.  `Now, listen to me, Barrymore! I have no interest inthis matter but that of your master. I have come here withno object except to help him. Tell me, frankly, what it isthat you don't like.'  Barrymore hesitated for a moment, as if he regretted hisoutburst, or found it difficult to express his own feelings inwords.  `It's all these goings-on, sir,' he cried at last, waving hishand towards the rain-lashed window which faced themoor. `There's foul play somewhere, and there's blackvillainy brewing, to that I'll swear! Very glad I should be,sir, to see Sir Henry on his way back to London again!'  `But what is it that alarms you?'  `Look at Sir Charles's death! That was bad enough, forall that the coroner said. Look at the noises on the moor atnight. There's not a man would cross it after sundown ifhe was paid for it. Look at this stranger hiding out yonder,and watching and waiting! What's he waiting for? What          
does it mean? It means no good to anyone of the name ofBaskerville, and very glad I shall be to be quit of it all onthe day that Sir Henry's new servants are ready to takeover the Hall.'  `But about this stranger,' said I. `Can you tell meanything about him? What did Selden say? Did he find outwhere he hid, or what he was doing?'  `He saw him once or twice, but he is a deep one, andgives nothing away. At first he thought that he was thepolice, but soon he found that he had some lay of hisown. A kind of gentleman he was, as far as he could see,but what he was doing he could not make out.'  `And where did he say that he lived?'  `Among the old houses on the hillside--the stone hutswhere the old folk used to live.'  `But how about his food?'  `Selden found out that he has got a lad who works forhim and brings him all he needs. I dare say he goes toCoombe Tracey for what he wants.'  `Very good, Barrymore. We may talk further of thissome other time.' When the butler had gone I walkedover to the black window, and I looked through a blurredpane at the driving clouds and at the tossing outline of thewind-swept trees. It is a wild night indoors, and what          
must it be in a stone hut upon the moor. What passion ofhatred can it be which leads a man to lurk in such a placeat such a time! And what deep and earnest purpose can hehave which calls for such a trial! There, in that hut uponthe moor, seems to lie the very centre of that problemwhich has vexed me so sorely. I swear that another dayshall not have passed before I have done all that man cando to reach the heart of the mystery.          
        
       The Man on the Tor The extract from my private diary which forms the lastchapter has brought my narrative up to the 18th ofOctober, a time when these strange events began to moveswiftly towards their terrible conclusion. The incidents ofthe next few days are indelibly graven upon myrecollection, and I can tell them without reference to thenotes made at the time. I start then from the day whichsucceeded that upon which I had established two facts ofgreat importance, the one that Mrs. Laura Lyons ofCoombe Tracey had written to Sir Charles Baskerville andmade an appointment with him at the very place and hourthat he met his death, the other that the lurking man uponthe moor was to be found among the stone huts upon thehill-side. With these two facts in my possession I felt thateither my intelligence or my courage must be deficient if Icould not throw some further light upon these dark places. I had no opportunity to tell the baronet what I hadlearned about Mrs. Lyons upon the evening before, forDr. Mortimer remained with him at cards until it was verylate. At breakfast, however, I informed him about my          
discovery, and asked him whether he would care toaccompany me to Coombe Tracey. At first he was veryeager to come, but on second thoughts it seemed to bothof us that if I went alone the results might be better. Themore formal we made the visit the less information wemight obtain. I left Sir Henry behind, therefore, notwithout some prickings of conscience, and drove off uponmy new quest.  When I reached Coombe Tracey I told Perkins to putup the horses, and I made inquiries for the lady whom Ihad come to interrogate. I had no difficulty in finding herrooms, which were central and well appointed. A maidshowed me in without ceremony, and as I entered thesitting-room a lady, who was sitting before a Remingtontypewriter, sprang up with a pleasant smile of welcome.Her face fell, however, when she saw that I was a stranger,and she sat down again and asked me the object of myvisit.  The first impression left by Mrs. Lyons was one ofextreme beauty. Her eyes and hair were of the same richhazel colour, and her cheeks, though considerablyfreckled, were flushed with the exquisite bloom of thebrunette, the dainty pink which lurks at the heart of thesulphur rose. Admiration was, I repeat, the first          
impression. But the second was criticism. There wassomething subtly wrong with the face, some coarseness ofexpression, some hardness, perhaps, of eye, some loosenessof lip which marred its perfect beauty. But these, ofcourse, are after-thoughts. At the moment I was simplyconscious that I was in the presence of a very handsomewoman, and that she was asking me the reasons for myvisit. I had not quite understood until that instant howdelicate my mission was. `I have the pleasure,' said I, `of knowing your father.' Itwas a clumsy introduction, and the lady made me feel it. `There is nothing in common between my father andme,' she said. `I owe him nothing, and his friends are notmine. If it were not for the late Sir Charles Baskerville andsome other kind hearts I might have starved for all that myfather cared.' `It was about the late Sir Charles Baskerville that I havecome here to see you.' The freckles started out on the lady's face. `What can I tell you about him?' she asked, and herfingers played nervously over the stops of her typewriter. `You knew him, did you not?'          
 `I have already said that I owe a great deal to hiskindness. If I am able to support myself it is largely due tothe interest which he took in my unhappy situation.' `Did you correspond with him?' The lady looked quickly up with an angry gleam in herhazel eyes. `What is the object of these questions?' she askedsharply. `The object is to avoid a public scandal. It is better thatI should ask them here than that the matter should passoutside our control.' She was silent and her face was still very pale. At lastshe looked up with something reckless and defiant in hermanner. `Well, I'll answer,' she said. `What are your questions?' `Did you correspond with Sir Charles?' `I certainly wrote to him once or twice to acknowledgehis delicacy and his generosity.' `Have you the dates of those letters?' `No.' `Have you ever met him?' `Yes, once or twice, when he came into CoombeTracey. He was a very retiring man, and he preferred todo good by stealth.'          
 `But if you saw him so seldom and wrote so seldom,how did he know enough about your affairs to be able tohelp you, as you say that he has done?' She met my difficulty with the utmost readiness. `There were several gentlemen who knew my sadhistory and united to help me. One was Mr. Stapleton, aneighbour and intimate friend of Sir Charles's. He wasexceedingly kind, and it was through him that Sir Charleslearned about my affairs.' I knew already that Sir Charles Baskerville had madeStapleton his almoner upon several occasions, so the lady'sstatement bore the impress of truth upon it. `Did you ever write to Sir Charles asking him to meetyou?' I continued. Mrs. Lyons flushed with anger again. `Really, sir, this is a very extraordinary question.' `I am sorry, madam, but I must repeat it.' `Then I answer, certainly not.' `Not on the very day of Sir Charles's death?' The flush had faded in an instant, and a deathly facewas before me. Her dry lips could not speak the `No'which I saw rather than heard. `Surely your memory deceives you,' said I. `I couldeven quote a passage of your letter. It ran `Please, please, as          
you are a gentleman, burn this letter, and be at the gate byten o'clock.'' I thought that she had fainted, but she recovered herselfby a supreme effort. `Is there no such thing as a gentleman?' she gasped. `You do Sir Charles an injustice. He did burn theletter. But sometimes a letter may be legible even whenburned. You acknowledge now that you wrote it?' `Yes, I did write it,' she cried, pouring out her soul in atorrent of words. `I did write it. Why should I deny it? Ihave no reason to be ashamed of it. I wished him to helpme. I believed that if I had an interview I could gain hishelp, so I asked him to meet me.' `But why at such an hour?' `Because I had only just learned that he was going toLondon next day and might be away for months. Therewere reasons why I could not get there earlier.' `But why a rendezvous in the garden instead of a visitto the house?' `Do you think a woman could go alone at that hour toa bachelor's house?' `Well, what happened when you did get there?' `I never went.' `Mrs. Lyons!'          
  `No, I swear it to you on all I hold sacred. I neverwent. Something intervened to prevent my going.'  `What was that?'  `That is a private matter. I cannot tell it.'  `You acknowledge then that you made an appointmentwith Sir Charles at the very hour and place at which hemet his death, but you deny that you kept theappointment.'  `That is the truth.'  Again and again I cross-questioned her, but I couldnever get past that point.  `Mrs. Lyons,' said I, as I rose from this long andinconclusive interview, `you are taking a very greatresponsibility and putting yourself in a very false positionby not making an absolutely clean breast of all that youknow. If I have to call in the aid of the police you willfind how seriously you are compromised. If your positionis innocent, why did you in the first instance deny havingwritten to Sir Charles upon that date?'  `Because I feared that some false conclusion might bedrawn from it and that I might find myself involved in ascandal.'  `And why were you so pressing that Sir Charles shoulddestroy your letter?'          
 `If you have read the letter you will know.' `I did not say that I had read all the letter.' `You quoted some of it.' `I quoted the postscript. The letter had, as I said, beenburned and it was not all legible. I ask you once again whyit was that you were so pressing that Sir Charles shoulddestroy this letter which he received on the day of hisdeath.' `The matter is a very private one.' `The more reason why you should avoid a publicinvestigation.' `I will tell you, then. If you have heard anything of myunhappy history you will know that I made a rashmarriage and had reason to regret it.' `I have heard so much.' `My life has been one incessant persecution from ahusband whom I abhor. The law is upon his side, andevery day I am faced by the possibility that he may forceme to live with him. At the time that I wrote this letter toSir Charles I had learned that there was a prospect of myregaining my freedom if certain expenses could be met. Itmeant everything to me--peace of mind, happiness, self-respect--everything. I knew Sir Charles's generosity, and I          
thought that if he heard the story from my own lips hewould help me.' `Then how is it that you did not go?' `Because I received help in the interval from anothersource.' `Why then, did you not write to Sir Charles andexplain this?' `So I should have done had I not seen his death in thepaper next morning.' The woman's story hung coherently together, and allmy questions were unable to shake it. I could only checkit by finding if she had, indeed, instituted divorceproceedings against her husband at or about the time ofthe tragedy. It was unlikely that she would dare to say that she hadnot been to Baskerville Hall if she really had been, for atrap would be necessary to take her there, and could nothave returned to Coombe Tracey until the early hours ofthe morning. Such an excursion could not be kept secret.The probability was, therefore, that she was telling thetruth, or, at least, a part of the truth. I came away baffledand disheartened. Once again I had reached that dead wallwhich seemed to be built across every path by which Itried to get at the object of my mission. And yet the more          
I thought of the lady's face and of her manner the more Ifelt that something was being held back from me. Whyshould she turn so pale? Why should she fight againstevery admission until it was forced from her? Why shouldshe have been so reticent at the time of the tragedy? Surelythe explanation of all this could not be as innocent as shewould have me believe. For the moment I could proceedno farther in that direction, but must turn back to thatother clue which was to be sought for among the stonehuts upon the moor. And that was a most vague direction. I realized it as Idrove back and noted how hill after hill showed traces ofthe ancient people. Barrymore's only indication had beenthat the stranger lived in one of these abandoned huts, andmany hundreds of them are scattered throughout thelength and breadth of the moor. But I had my ownexperience for a guide since it had shown me the manhimself standing upon the summit of the Black Tor. Thatthen should be the centre of my search. From there Ishould explore every hut upon the moor until I lightedupon the right one. If this man were inside it I should findout from his own lips, at the point of my revolver ifnecessary, who he was and why he had dogged us so long.He might slip away from us in the crowd of Regent          
Street, but it would puzzle him to do so upon the lonelymoor. On the other hand, if I should find the hut and itstenant should not be within it I must remain there,however long the vigil, until he returned. Holmes hadmissed him in London. It would indeed be a triumph forme if I could run him to earth, where my master hadfailed.  Luck had been against us again and again in thisinquiry, but now at last it came to my aid. And themessenger of good fortune was none other than Mr.Frankland, who was standing, gray-whiskered and red-faced, outside the gate of his garden, which opened on tothe high road along which I travelled.  `Good-day, Dr. Watson,' cried he with unwontedgood humour, `you must really give your horses a rest, andcome in to have a glass of wine and to congratulate me.'  My feelings towards him were very far from beingfriendly after what I had heard of his treatment of hisdaughter, but I was anxious to send Perkins and thewagonette home, and the opportunity was a good one. Ialighted and sent a message to Sir Henry that I shouldwalk over in time for dinner. Then I followed Franklandinto his dining-room.          
 `It is a great day for me, sir--one of the red-letter daysof my life,' he cried with many chuckles. `I have broughtoff a double event. I mean to teach them in these partsthat law is law, and that there is a man here who does notfear to invoke it. I have established a right of way throughthe centre of old Middleton's park, slap across it, sir,within a hundred yards of his own front door. What doyou think of that? We'll teach these magnates that theycannot ride roughshod over the rights of the commoners,confound them! And I've closed the wood where theFernworthy folk used to picnic. These infernal peopleseem to think that there are no rights of property, and thatthey can swarm where they like with their papers andtheir bottles. Both cases decided, Dr. Watson, and both inmy favour. I haven't had such a day since I had Sir JohnMorland for trespass, because he shot in his own warren.' `How on earth did you do that?' `Look it up in the books, sir. It will repay reading--Frankland v. Morland, Court of Queen's Bench. It costme 200 pounds, but I got my verdict.' `Did it do you any good?' `None, sir, none. I am proud to say that I had nointerest in the matter. I act entirely from a sense of publicduty. I have no doubt, for example, that the Fernworthy          
people will burn me in effigy to-night. I told the policelast time they did it that they should stop these disgracefulexhibitions. The County Constabulary is in a scandalousstate, sir, and it has not afforded me the protection towhich I am entitled. The case of Frankland v. Regina willbring the matter before the attention of the public. I toldthem that they would have occasion to regret theirtreatment of me, and already my words have come true.' `How so?' I asked. The old man put on a very knowing expression. `Because I could tell them what they are dying toknow; but nothing would induce me to help the rascals inany way.' I had been casting round for some excuse by which Icould get away from his gossip, but now I began to wishto hear more of it. I had seen enough of the contrarynature of the old sinner to understand that any strong signof interest would be the surest way to stop his confidences. `Some poaching case, no doubt?' said I, with anindifferent manner. `Ha, ha, my boy, a very much more important matterthan that! What about the convict on the moor?' I started. `You don't mean that you know where he is?'said I.          
 `I may not know exactly where he is, but I am quitesure that I could help the police to lay their hands on him.Has it never struck you that the way to catch that man wasto find out where he got his food, and so trace it to him?' He certainly seemed to be getting uncomfortably nearthe truth. `No doubt,' said I; `but how do you know thathe is anywhere upon the moor?' `I know it because I have seen with my own eyes themessenger who takes him his food.' My heart sank for Barrymore. It was a serious thing tobe in the power of this spiteful old busybody. But his nextremark took a weight from my mind. `You'll be surprised to hear that his food is taken tohim by a child. I see him every day through my telescopeupon the roof. He passes along the same path at the samehour, and to whom should he be going except to theconvict?' Here was luck indeed! And yet I suppressed allappearance of interest. A child! Barrymore had said thatour unknown was supplied by a boy. It was on his track,and not upon the convict's, that Frankland had stumbled.If I could get his knowledge it might save me a long andweary hunt. But incredulity and indifference wereevidently my strongest cards.          
 `I should say that it was much more likely that it wasthe son of one of the moorland shepherds taking out hisfather's dinner.' The least appearance of opposition struck fire out of theold autocrat. His eyes looked malignantly at me, and hisgray whiskers bristled like those of an angry cat. `Indeed, sir!' said he, pointing out over the wide-stretching moor. `Do you see that Black Tor over yonder?Well, do you see the low hill beyond with the thornbushupon it? It is the stoniest part of the whole moor. Is that aplace where a shepherd would be likely to take his station?Your suggestion, sir, is a most absurd one.' I meekly answered that I had spoken without knowingall the facts. My submission pleased him and led him tofurther confidences. `You may be sure, sir, that I have very good groundsbefore I come to an opinion. I have seen the boy againand again with his bundle. Every day, and sometimestwice a day, I have been able--but wait a moment, Dr.Watson. Do my eyes deceive me, or is there at the presentmoment something moving upon that hill- side?' It was several miles off, but I could distinctly see a smalldark dot against the dull green and gray.          
 `Come, sir, come!' cried Frankland, rushing upstairs.`You will see with your own eyes and judge for yourself.' The telescope, a formidable instrument mounted upona tripod, stood upon the flat leads of the house. Franklandclapped his eye to it and gave a cry of satisfaction. `Quick, Dr. Watson, quick, before he passes over thehill!' There he was, sure enough, a small urchin with a littlebundle upon his shoulder, toiling slowly up the hill. Whenhe reached the crest I saw the ragged uncouth figureoutlined for an instant against the cold blue sky. Helooked round him with a furtive and stealthy air, as onewho dreads pursuit. Then he vanished over the hill. `Well! Am I right?' `Certainly, there is a boy who seems to have somesecret errand.' `And what the errand is even a county constable couldguess. But not one word shall they have from me, and Ibind you to secrecy also, Dr. Watson. Not a word! Youunderstand!' `Just as you wish.' `They have treated me shamefully--shamefully. Whenthe facts come out in Frankland v. Regina I venture tothink that a thrill of indignation will run through the          
country. Nothing would induce me to help the police inany way. For all they cared it might have been me, insteadof my effigy, which these rascals burned at the stake.Surely you are not going! You will help me to empty thedecanter in honour of this great occasion!' But I resisted all his solicitations and succeeded indissuading him from his announced intention of walkinghome with me. I kept the road as long as his eye was onme, and then I struck off across the moor and made forthe stony hill over which the boy had disappeared.Everything was working in my favour, and I swore that itshould not be through lack of energy or perseverance thatI should miss the chance which fortune had thrown in myway. The sun was already sinking when I reached thesummit of the hill, and the long slopes beneath me wereall golden-green on one side and gray shadow on theother. A haze lay low upon the farthest sky-line, out ofwhich jutted the fantastic shapes of Belliver and VixenTor. Over the wide expanse there was no sound and nomovement. One great gray bird, a gull or curlew, soaredaloft in the blue heaven. He and I seemed to be the onlyliving things between the huge arch of the sky and thedesert beneath it. The barren scene, the sense of loneliness,          
and the mystery and urgency of my task all struck a chillinto my heart. The boy was nowhere to be seen. Butdown beneath me in a cleft of the hills there was a circleof the old stone huts, and in the middle of them there wasone which retained sufficient roof to act as a screen againstthe weather. My heart leaped within me as I saw it. Thismust be the burrow where the stranger lurked. At last myfoot was on the threshold of his hiding place--his secretwas within my grasp. As I approached the hut, walking as warily as Stapletonwould do when with poised net he drew near the settledbutterfly, I satisfied myself that the place had indeed beenused as a habitation. A vague pathway among the bouldersled to the dilapidated opening which served as a door. Allwas silent within. The unknown might be lurking there,or he might be prowling on the moor. My nerves tingledwith the sense of adventure. Throwing aside my cigarette,I closed my hand upon the butt of my revolver and,walking swiftly up to the door, I looked in. The place wasempty. But there were ample signs that I had not come upon afalse scent. This was certainly where the man lived. Someblankets rolled in a waterproof lay upon that very stoneslab upon which Neolithic man had once slumbered. The          
ashes of a fire were heaped in a rude grate. Beside it laysome cooking utensils and a bucket half-full of water. Alitter of empty tins showed that the place had beenoccupied for some time, and I saw, as my eyes becameaccustomed to the checkered light, a pannikin and a half-full bottle of spirits standing in the corner. In the middleof the hut a flat stone served the purpose of a table, andupon this stood a small cloth bundle--the same, no doubt,which I had seen through the telescope upon the shoulderof the boy. It contained a loaf of bread, a tinned tongue,and two tins of preserved peaches. As I set it down again,after having examined it, my heart leaped to see thatbeneath it there lay a sheet of paper with writing upon it. Iraised it, and this was what I read, roughly scrawled inpencil:--  Dr. Watson has gone to Coombe Tracey.  For a minute I stood there with the paper in my handsthinking out the meaning of this curt message. It was I,then, and not Sir Henry, who was being dogged by thissecret man. He had not followed me himself, but he hadset an agent--the boy, perhaps--upon my track, and thiswas his report. Possibly I had taken no step since I hadbeen upon the moor which had not been observed andreported. Always there was this feeling of an unseen force,          
a fine net drawn round us with infinite skill and delicacy,holding us so lightly that it was only at some suprememoment that one realized that one was indeed entangledin its meshes. If there was one report there might be others, so Ilooked round the hut in search of them. There was notrace, however, of anything of the kind, nor could Idiscover any sign which might indicate the character orintentions of the man who lived in this singular place, savethat he must be of Spartan habits and cared little for thecomforts of life. When I thought of the heavy rains andlooked at the gaping roof I understood how strong andimmutable must be the purpose which had kept him inthat inhospitable abode. Was he our malignant enemy, orwas he by chance our guardian angel? I swore that I wouldnot leave the hut until I knew. Outside the sun was sinking low and the west wasblazing with scarlet and gold. Its reflection was shot backin ruddy patches by the distant pools which lay amid thegreat Grimpen Mire. There were the two towers ofBaskerville Hall, and there a distant blur of smoke whichmarked the village of Grimpen. Between the two, behindthe hill, was the house of the Stapletons. All was sweet andmellow and peaceful in the golden evening light, and yet          
as I looked at them my soul shared none of the peace ofnature but quivered at the vagueness and the terror of thatinterview which every instant was bringing nearer. Withtingling nerves, but a fixed purpose, I sat in the dark recessof the hut and waited with sombre patience for thecoming of its tenant. And then at last I heard him. Far away came the sharpclink of a boot striking upon a stone. Then another andyet another, coming nearer and nearer. I shrank back intothe darkest corner, and cocked the pistol in my pocket,determined not to discover myself until I had anopportunity of seeing something of the stranger. Therewas a long pause which showed that he had stopped. Thenonce more the footsteps approached and a shadow fellacross the opening of the hut. `It is a lovely evening, my dear Watson,' said a well-known voice. `I really think that you will be morecomfortable outside than in.'          
        
      Death on the Moor For a moment or two I sat breathless, hardly able tobelieve my ears. Then my senses and my voice came backto me, while a crushing weight of responsibility seemed inan instant to be lifted from my soul. That cold, incisive,ironical voice could belong to but one man in all theworld. `Holmes!' I cried--`Holmes!' `Come out,' said he, `and please be careful with therevolver.' I stooped under the rude lintel, and there he sat upon astone outside, his gray eyes dancing with amusement asthey fell upon my astonished features. He was thin andworn, but clear and alert, his keen face bronzed by the sunand roughened by the wind. In his tweed suit and clothcap he looked like any other tourist upon the moor, andhe had contrived, with that cat-like love of personalcleanliness which was one of his characteristics, that hischin should be as smooth and his linen as perfect as if hewere in Baker Street.          
 `I never was more glad to see anyone in my life,' said I,as I wrung him by the hand. `Or more astonished, eh?' `Well, I must confess to it.' `The surprise was not all on one side, I assure you. Ihad no idea that you had found my occasional retreat, stillless that you were inside it, until I was within twentypaces of the door.' `My footprint, I presume?' `No, Watson; I fear that I could not undertake torecognize your footprint amid all the footprints of theworld. If you seriously desire to deceive me you mustchange your tobacconist; for when I see the stub of acigarette marked Bradley, Oxford Street, I know that myfriend Watson is in the neighbourhood. You will see itthere beside the path. You threw it down, no doubt, atthat supreme moment when you charged into the emptyhut.' `Exactly.' `I thought as much--and knowing your admirabletenacity I was convinced that you were sitting in ambush,a weapon within reach, waiting for the tenant to return.So you actually thought that I was the criminal?'          
 `I did not know who you were, but I was determinedto find out.' `Excellent, Watson! And how did you localize me?You saw me, perhaps, on the night of the convict hunt,when I was so imprudent as to allow the moon to risebehind me?' `Yes, I saw you then.' `And have no doubt searched all the huts until youcame to this one?' `No, your boy had been observed, and that gave me aguide where to look.' `The old gentleman with the telescope, no doubt. Icould not make it out when first I saw the light flashingupon the lens.' He rose and peeped into the hut. `Ha, I seethat Cartwright has brought up some supplies. What's thispaper? So you have been to Coombe Tracey, have you?' `Yes.' `To see Mrs. Laura Lyons?' `Exactly.' `Well done! Our researches have evidently beenrunning on parallel lines, and when we unite our results Iexpect we shall have a fairly full knowledge of the case.' `Well, I am glad from my heart that you are here, forindeed the responsibility and the mystery were both          
becoming too much for my nerves. But how in the nameof wonder did you come here, and what have you beendoing? I thought that you were in Baker Street workingout that case of blackmailing.' `That was what I wished you to think.' `Then you use me, and yet do not trust me!' I criedwith some bitterness. `I think that I have deserved better atyour hands, Holmes.' `My dear fellow, you have been invaluable to me inthis as in many other cases, and I beg that you will forgiveme if I have seemed to play a trick upon you. In truth, itwas partly for your own sake that I did it, and it was myappreciation of the danger which you ran which led me tocome down and examine the matter for myself. Had Ibeen with Sir Henry and you it is confident that my pointof view would have been the same as yours, and mypresence would have warned our very formidableopponents to be on their guard. As it is, I have been ableto get about as I could not possibly have done had I beenliving in the Hall, and I remain an unknown factor in thebusiness, ready to throw in all my weight at a criticalmoment.' `But why keep me in the dark?'          
 `For you to know could not have helped us, and mightpossibly have led to my discovery. You would havewished to tell me something, or in your kindness youwould have brought me out some comfort or other, andso an unnecessary risk would be run. I brought Cartwrightdown with me--you remember the little chap at theexpress office--and he has seen after my simple wants: aloaf of bread and a clean collar. What does man wantmore? He has given me an extra pair of eyes upon a veryactive pair of feet, and both have been invaluable.' `Then my reports have all been wasted!'--My voicetrembled as I recalled the pains and the pride with which Ihad composed them. Holmes took a bundle of papers from his pocket. `Here are your reports, my dear fellow, and very wellthumbed, I assure you. I made excellent arrangements, andthey are only delayed one day upon their way. I mustcompliment you exceedingly upon the zeal and theintelligence which you have shown over an extraordinarilydifficult case.' I was still rather raw over the deception which hadbeen practised upon me, but the warmth of Holmes'spraise drove my anger from my mind. I felt also in myheart that he was right in what he said and that it was          
really best for our purpose that I should not have knownthat he was upon the moor.  `That's better,' said he, seeing the shadow rise from myface. `And now tell me the result of your visit to Mrs.Laura Lyons--it was not difficult for me to guess that itwas to see her that you had gone, for I am already awarethat she is the one person in Coombe Tracey who mightbe of service to us in the matter. In fact, if you had notgone to-day it is exceedingly probable that I should havegone to-morrow.'  The sun had set and dusk was settling over the moor.The air had turned chill and we withdrew into the hut forwarmth. There, sitting together in the twilight, I toldHolmes of my conversation with the lady. So interestedwas he that I had to repeat some of it twice before he wassatisfied.  `This is most important,' said he when I had concluded.`It fills up a gap which I had been unable to bridge, in thismost complex affair. You are aware, perhaps, that a closeintimacy exists between this lady and the man Stapleton?'  `I did not know of a close intimacy.'  `There can be no doubt about the matter. They meet,they write, there is a complete understanding between          
them. Now, this puts a very powerful weapon into ourhands. If I could only use it to detach his wife----` `His wife?' `I am giving you some information now, in return forall that you have given me. The lady who has passed hereas Miss Stapleton is in reality his wife.' `Good heavens, Holmes! Are you sure of what you say?How could he have permitted Sir Henry to fall in lovewith her?' `Sir Henry's falling in love could do no harm to anyoneexcept Sir Henry. He took particular care that Sir Henrydid not make love to her, as you have yourself observed. Irepeat that the lady is his wife and not his sister.' `But why this elaborate deception?' `Because he foresaw that she would be very much moreuseful to him in the character of a free woman.' All my unspoken instincts, my vague suspicions,suddenly took shape and centred upon the naturalist. Inthat impassive, colourless man, with his straw hat and hisbutterfly-net, I seemed to see something terrible--acreature of infinite patience and craft, with a smiling faceand a murderous heart. `It is he, then, who is our enemy--it is he who doggedus in London?'          
  `So I read the riddle.'  `And the warning--it must have come from her!'  `Exactly.'  The shape of some monstrous villainy, half seen, halfguessed, loomed through the darkness which had girt meso long.  `But are you sure of this, Holmes? How do you knowthat the woman is his wife?'  `Because he so far forgot himself as to tell you a truepiece of autobiography upon the occasion when he firstmet you, and I dare say he has many a time regretted itsince. He was once a schoolmaster in the north ofEngland. Now, there is no one more easy to trace than aschoolmaster. There are scholastic agencies by which onemay identify any man who has been in the profession. Alittle investigation showed me that a school had come togrief under atrocious circumstances, and that the man whohad owned it--the name was different--had disappearedwith his wife. The descriptions agreed. When I learnedthat the missing man was devoted to entomology theidentification was complete.'  The darkness was rising, but much was still hidden bythe shadows.          
 `If this woman is in truth his wife, where does Mrs.Laura Lyons come in?' I asked. `That is one of the points upon which your ownresearches have shed a light. Your interview with the ladyhas cleared the situation very much. I did not know abouta projected divorce between herself and her husband. Inthat case, regarding Stapleton as an unmarried man, shecounted no doubt upon becoming his wife.' `And when she is undeceived?' `Why, then we may find the lady of service. It must beour first duty to see her--both of us--to-morrow. Don'tyou think, Watson, that you are away from your chargerather long? Your place should be at Baskerville Hall.' The last red streaks had faded away in the west andnight had settled upon the moor. A few faint stars weregleaming in a violet sky. `One last question, Holmes,' I said, as I rose. `Surelythere is no need of secrecy between you and me. What isthe meaning of it all? What is he after?' Holmes's voice sank as he answered:---- `It is  murder,   Watson--refined, cold-blooded,deliberate murder. Do not ask me for particulars. My netsare closing upon him, even as his are upon Sir Henry, andwith your help he is already almost at my mercy. There is          
but one danger which can threaten us. It is that he shouldstrike before we are ready to do so. Another day--two atthe most--and I have my case complete, but until thenguard your charge as closely as ever a fond motherwatched her ailing child. Your mission to-day has justifieditself, and yet I could almost wish that you had not left hisside. Hark!'  A terrible scream--a prolonged yell of horror andanguish--burst out of the silence of the moor. Thatfrightful cry turned the blood to ice in my veins.  `Oh, my God!' I gasped. `What is it? What does itmean?'  Holmes had sprung to his feet, and I saw his dark,athletic outline at the door of the hut, his shouldersstooping, his head thrust forward, his face peering into thedarkness.  `Hush!' he whispered. `Hush!'  The cry had been loud on account of its vehemence,but it had pealed out from somewhere far off on theshadowy plain. Now it burst upon our ears, nearer,louder, more urgent than before.  `Where is it?' Holmes whispered; and I knew from thethrill of his voice that he, the man of iron, was shaken tothe soul. `Where is it, Watson?'          
 `There, I think.' I pointed into the darkness. `No, there!' Again the agonized cry swept through the silent night,louder and much nearer than ever. And a new soundmingled with it, a deep, muttered rumble, musical and yetmenacing, rising and falling like the low, constant murmurof the sea. `The hound!' cried Holmes. `Come, Watson, come!Great heavens, if we are too late!' He had started running swiftly over the moor, and Ihad followed at his heels. But now from somewhereamong the broken ground immediately in front of us therecame one last despairing yell, and then a dull, heavy thud.We halted and listened. Not another sound broke theheavy silence of the windless night. I saw Holmes put his hand to his forehead like a mandistracted. He stamped his feet upon the ground. `He has beaten us, Watson. We are too late.' `No, no, surely not!' `Fool that I was to hold my hand. And you, Watson,see what comes of abandoning your charge! But, byHeaven, if the worst has happened, we'll avenge him!' Blindly we ran through the gloom, blundering againstboulders, forcing our way through gorse bushes, panting          
up hills and rushing down slopes, heading always in thedirection whence those dreadful sounds had come. Atevery rise Holmes looked eagerly round him, but theshadows were thick upon the moor, and nothing movedupon its dreary face. `Can you see anything?' `Nothing.' `But, hark, what is that?' A low moan had fallen upon our ears. There it wasagain upon our left! On that side a ridge of rocks ended ina sheer cliff which overlooked a stone-strewn slope. On itsjagged face was spread-eagled some dark, irregular object.As we ran towards it the vague outline hardened into adefinite shape. It was a prostrate man face downward uponthe ground, the head doubled under him at a horribleangle, the shoulders rounded and the body hunchedtogether as if in the act of throwing a somersault. Sogrotesque was the attitude that I could not for the instantrealize that that moan had been the passing of his soul.Not a whisper, not a rustle, rose now from the dark figureover which we stooped. Holmes laid his hand upon him,and held it up again, with an exclamation of horror. Thegleam of the match which he struck shone upon hisclotted fingers and upon the ghastly pool which widened          
slowly from the crushed skull of the victim. And it shoneupon something else which turned our hearts sick andfaint within us--the body of Sir Henry Baskerville! There was no chance of either of us forgetting thatpeculiar ruddy tweed suit--the very one which he hadworn on the first morning that we had seen him in BakerStreet. We caught the one clear glimpse of it, and then thematch flickered and went out, even as the hope had goneout of our souls. Holmes groaned, and his face glimmeredwhite through the darkness. `The brute! the brute!' I cried with clenched hands.`Oh Holmes, I shall never forgive myself for having lefthim to his fate.' `I am more to blame than you, Watson. In order tohave my case well rounded and complete, I have thrownaway the life of my client. It is the greatest blow which hasbefallen me in my career. But how could I know--howcould l know--that he would risk his life alone upon themoor in the face of all my warnings?' `That we should have heard his screams--my God,those screams!--and yet have been unable to save him!Where is this brute of a hound which drove him to hisdeath? It may be lurking among these rocks at this instant.And Stapleton, where is he? He shall answer for this deed.'          
 `He shall. I will see to that. Uncle and nephew havebeen murdered--the one frightened to death by the verysight of a beast which he thought to be supernatural, theother driven to his end in his wild flight to escape from it.But now we have to prove the connection between theman and the beast. Save from what we heard, we cannoteven swear to the existence of the latter, since Sir Henryhas evidently died from the fall. But, by heavens, cunningas he is, the fellow shall be in my power before anotherday is past!' We stood with bitter hearts on either side of themangled body, overwhelmed by this sudden andirrevocable disaster which had brought all our long andweary labours to so piteous an end. Then, as the moonrose we climbed to the top of the rocks over which ourpoor friend had fallen, and from the summit we gazed outover the shadowy moor, half silver and half gloom. Faraway, miles off, in the direction of Grimpen, a singlesteady yellow light was shining. It could only come fromthe lonely abode of the Stapletons. With a bitter curse Ishook my fist at it as I gazed. `Why should we not seize him at once?' `Our case is not complete. The fellow is wary andcunning to the last degree. It is not what we know, but          
what we can prove. If we make one false move the villainmay escape us yet.'  `What can we do?'  `There will be plenty for us to do to-morrow. To-nightwe can only perform the last offices to our poor friend.'  Together we made our way down the precipitous slopeand approached the body, black and clear against thesilvered stones. The agony of those contorted limbs struckme with a spasm of pain and blurred my eyes with tears.  `We must send for help, Holmes! We cannot carry himall the way to the Hall. Good heavens, are you mad?'  He had uttered a cry and bent over the body. Now hewas dancing and laughing and wringing my hand. Couldthis be my stern, self-contained friend? These were hiddenfires, indeed!  `A beard! A beard! The man has a beard!'  `A beard?'  `It is not the baronet--it is--why, it is my neighbour,the convict!'  With feverish haste we had turned the body over, andthat dripping beard was pointing up to the cold, clearmoon. There could be no doubt about the beetlingforehead, the sunken animal eyes. It was indeed the same          
face which had glared upon me in the light of the candlefrom over the rock--the face of Selden, the criminal. Then in an instant it was all clear to me. I rememberedhow the baronet had told me that he had handed his oldwardrobe to Barrymore. Barrymore had passed it on inorder to help Selden in his escape. Boots, shirt, cap--itwas all Sir Henry's. The tragedy was still black enough,but this man had at least deserved death by the laws of hiscountry. I told Holmes how the matter stood, my heartbubbling over with thankfulness and joy. `Then the clothes have been the poor devil's death,'said he. `It is clear enough that the hound has been laid onfrom some article of Sir Henry's--the boot which wasabstracted in the hotel, in all probability--and so ran thisman down. There is one very singular thing, however:How came Selden, in the darkness, to know that thehound was on his trail?' `He heard him.' `To hear a hound upon the moor would not work ahard man like this convict into such a paroxysm of terrorthat he would risk recapture by screaming wildly for help.By his cries he must have run a long way after he knewthe animal was on his track. How did he know?'          
 `A greater mystery to me is why this hound, presumingthat all our conjectures are correct --` `I presume nothing.' `Well, then, why this hound should be loose to-night. Isuppose that it does not always run loose upon the moor.Stapleton would not let it go unless he had reason to thinkthat Sir Henry would be there.' `My difficulty is the more formidable of the two, for Ithink that we shall very shortly get an explanation ofyours, while mine may remain forever a mystery. Thequestion now is, what shall we do with this poor wretch'sbody? We cannot leave it here to the foxes and theravens.' `I suggest that we put it in one of the huts until we cancommunicate with the police.' `Exactly. I have no doubt that you and I could carry itso far. Halloa, Watson, what's this? It's the man himself,by all that's wonderful and audacious! Not a word to showyour suspicions--not a word, or my plans crumble to theground.' A figure was approaching us over the moor, and I sawthe dull red glow of a cigar. The moon shone upon him,and I could distinguish the dapper shape and jaunty walk          
of the naturalist. He stopped when he saw us, and thencame on again. `Why, Dr. Watson, that's not you, is it? You are thelast man that I should have expected to see out on themoor at this time of night. But, dear me, what's this?Somebody hurt? Not--don't tell me that it is our friendSir Henry!' He hurried past me and stooped over the deadman. I heard a sharp intake of his breath and the cigar fellfrom his fingers. `Who--who's this?' he stammered. `It is Selden, the man who escaped from Princetown.' Stapleton turned a ghastly face upon us, but by asupreme effort he had overcome his amazement and hisdisappointment. He looked sharply from Holmes to me. `Dear me! What a very shocking affair! How did hedie?' `He appears to have broken his neck by falling overthese rocks. My friend and I were strolling on the moorwhen we heard a cry.' `I heard a cry also. That was what brought me out. Iwas uneasy about Sir Henry.' `Why about Sir Henry in particular?' I could not helpasking.          
 `Because I had suggested that he should come over.When he did not come I was surprised, and I naturallybecame alarmed for his safety when I heard cries upon themoor. By the way'--his eyes darted again from my face toHolmes's--`did you hear anything else besides a cry?' `No,' said Holmes; `did you?' `No.' `What do you mean, then?' `Oh, you know the stories that the peasants tell about aphantom hound, and so on. It is said to be heard at nightupon the moor. I was wondering if there were anyevidence of such a sound to-night.' `We heard nothing of the kind,' said I. `And what is your theory of this poor fellow's death?' `I have no doubt that anxiety and exposure have drivenhim off his head. He has rushed about the moor in a crazystate and eventually fallen over here and broken his neck.' `That seems the most reasonable theory,' said Stapleton,and he gave a sigh which I took to indicate his relief.`What do you think about it, Mr. Sherlock Holmes?' My friend bowed his compliments. `You are quick at identification,' said he. `We have been expecting you in these parts since Dr.Watson came down. You are in time to see a tragedy.'          
 `Yes, indeed. I have no doubt that my friend'sexplanation will cover the facts. I will take an unpleasantremembrance back to London with me to-morrow.' `Oh, you return to-morrow?' `That is my intention.' `I hope your visit has cast some light upon thoseoccurrences which have puzzled us?' Holmes shrugged his shoulders. `One cannot always have the success for which onehopes. An investigator needs facts, and not legends orrumours. It has not been a satisfactory case.' My friend spoke in his frankest and most unconcernedmanner. Stapleton still looked hard at him. Then heturned to me. `I would suggest carrying this poor fellow to my house,but it would give my sister such a fright that I do not feeljustified in doing it. I think that if we put something overhis face he will be safe until morning.' And so it was arranged. Resisting Stapleton's offer ofhospitality, Holmes and I set off to Baskerville Hall,leaving the naturalist to return alone. Looking back wesaw the figure moving slowly away over the broad moor,and behind him that one black smudge on the silvered          
slope which showed where the man was lying who hadcome so horribly to his end.          
        
       Fixing the Nets  `We're at close grips at last,' said Holmes as we walkedtogether across the moor. `What a nerve the fellow has!How he pulled himself together in the face of what musthave been a paralyzing shock when he found that thewrong man had fallen a victim to his plot. I told you inLondon, Watson, and I tell you now again, that we havenever had a foeman more worthy of our steel.'  `I am sorry that he has seen you.'  `And so was I at first. But there was no getting out ofit.'  `What effect do you think it will have upon his plansnow that he knows you are here?'  `It may cause him to be more cautious, or it may drivehim to desperate measures at once. Like most clevercriminals, he may be too confident in his own clevernessand imagine that he has completely deceived us.'  `Why should we not arrest him at once?'  `My dear Watson, you were born to be a man ofaction. Your instinct is always to do something energetic.But supposing, for argument's sake, that we had him          
arrested to-night, what on earth the better off should webe for that? We could prove nothing against him. There'sthe devilish cunning of it! If he were acting through ahuman agent we could get some evidence, but if we wereto drag this great dog to the light of day it would not helpus in putting a rope round the neck of its master.'  `Surely we have a case.'  `Not a shadow of one--only surmise and conjecture.We should be laughed out of court if we came with such astory and such evidence.'  `There is Sir Charles's death.'  `Found dead without a mark upon him. You and Iknow that he died of sheer fright, and we know also whatfrightened him; but how are we to get twelve stolidjurymen to know it? What signs are there of a hound?Where are the marks of its fangs? Of course we know thata hound does not bite a dead body and that Sir Charleswas dead before ever the brute overtook him. But wehave to prove all this, and we are not in a position to doit.'  `Well, then, to-night?'  `We are not much better off to-night. Again, there wasno direct connection between the hound and the man'sdeath. We never saw the hound. We heard it; but we          
could not prove that it was running upon this man's trail.There is a complete absence of motive. No, my dearfellow; we must reconcile ourselves to the fact that wehave no case at present, and that it is worth our while torun any risk in order to establish one.'  `And how do you propose to do so?'  `I have great hopes of what Mrs. Laura Lyons may dofor us when the position of affairs is made clear to her.And I have my own plan as well. Sufficient for to-morrowis the evil thereof; but I hope before the day is past to havethe upper hand at last.'  I could draw nothing further from him, and he walked,lost in thought, as far as the Baskerville gates.  `Are you coming up?'  `Yes; I see no reason for further concealment. But onelast word, Watson. Say nothing of the hound to SirHenry. Let him think that Selden's death was as Stapletonwould have us believe. He will have a better nerve for theordeal which he will have to undergo to-morrow, whenhe is engaged, if I remember your report aright, to dinewith these people.'  `And so am I.'          
 `Then you must excuse yourself and he must go alone.That will be easily arranged. And now, if we are too latefor dinner, I think that we are both ready for our suppers.' Sir Henry was more pleased than surprised to seeSherlock Holmes, for he had for some days been expectingthat recent events would bring him down from London.He did raise his eyebrows, however, when he found thatmy friend had neither any luggage nor any explanationsfor its absence. Between us we soon supplied his wants,and then over a belated supper we explained to thebaronet as much of our experience as it seemed desirablethat he should know. But first I had the unpleasant duty ofbreaking the news to Barrymore and his wife. To him itmay have been an unmitigated relief, but she wept bitterlyin her apron. To all the world he was the man of violence,half animal and half demon; but to her he always remainedthe little wilful boy of her own girlhood, the child whohad clung to her hand. Evil indeed is the man who has notone woman to mourn him. `I've been moping in the house all day since Watsonwent off in the morning,' said the baronet. `I guess Ishould have some credit, for I have kept my promise. If Ihadn't sworn not to go about alone I might have had a          
more lively evening, for I had a message from Stapletonasking me over there.'  `I have no doubt that you would have had a morelively evening,' said Holmes drily. `By the way, I don'tsuppose you appreciate that we have been mourning overyou as having broken your neck?'  Sir Henry opened his eyes. `How was that?'  `This poor wretch was dressed in your clothes. I fearyour servant who gave them to him may get into troublewith the police.'  `That is unlikely. There was no mark on any of them,as far as I know.'  `That's lucky for him--in fact, it's lucky for all of you,since you are all on the wrong side of the law in thismatter. I am not sure that as a conscientious detective myfirst duty is not to arrest the whole household. Watson'sreports are most incriminating documents.'  `But how about the case?' asked the baronet. `Have youmade anything out of the tangle? I don't know thatWatson and I are much the wiser since we came down.'  `I think that I shall be in a position to make thesituation rather more clear to you before long. It has beenan exceedingly difficult and most complicated business.          
There are several points upon which we still want light--but it is coming all the same.' `We've had one experience, as Watson has no doubttold you. We heard the hound on the moor, so I canswear that it is not all empty superstition. I had somethingto do with dogs when I was out West, and I know onewhen I hear one. If you can muzzle that one and put himon a chain I'll be ready to swear you are the greatestdetective of all time.' `I think I will muzzle him and chain him all right if youwill give me your help.' `Whatever you tell me to do I will do.' `Very good; and I will ask you also to do it blindly,without always asking the reason.' `Just as you like.' `If you will do this I think the chances are that our littleproblem will soon be solved. I have no doubt----` He stopped suddenly and stared fixedly up over myhead into the air. The lamp beat upon his face, and sointent was it and so still that it might have been that of aclear-cut classical statue, a personification of alertness andexpectation. `What is it?' we both cried.          
 I could see as he looked down that he was repressingsome internal emotion. His features were still composed,but his eyes shone with amused exultation. `Excuse the admiration of a connoisseur,' said he as hewaved his hand towards the line of portraits whichcovered the opposite wall. `Watson won't allow that Iknow anything of art, but that is mere jealousy, becauseour views upon the subject differ. Now, these are a reallyvery fine series of portraits.' `Well, I'm glad to hear you say so,' said Sir Henry,glancing with some surprise at my friend. `I don't pretendto know much about these things, and I'd be a betterjudge of a horse or a steer than of a picture. I didn't knowthat you found time for such things.' `I know what is good when I see it, and I see it now.That's a Kneller, I'll swear, that lady in the blue silk overyonder, and the stout gentleman with the wig ought to bea Reynolds. They are all family portraits, I presume?' `Every one.' `Do you know the names?' `Barrymore has been coaching me in them, and I thinkI can say my lessons fairly well.' `Who is the gentleman with the telescope?'          
 `That is Rear-Admiral Baskerville, who served underRodney in the West Indies. The man with the blue coatand the roll of paper is Sir William Baskerville, who wasChairman of Committees of the House of Commonsunder Pitt.' `And this Cavalier opposite to me--the one with theblack velvet and the lace?' `Ah, you have a right to know about him. That is thecause of all the mischief, the wicked Hugo, who startedthe Hound of the Baskervilles. We're not likely to forgethim.' I gazed with interest and some surprise upon theportrait. `Dear me!' said Holmes, `he seems a quiet, meek-mannered man enough, but I dare say that there was alurking devil in his eyes. I had pictured him as a morerobust and ruffianly person.' `There's no doubt about the authenticity, for the nameand the date, 1647, are on the back of the canvas.' Holmes said little more, but the picture of the oldroysterer seemed to have a fascination for him, and hiseyes were continually fixed upon it during supper. It wasnot until later, when Sir Henry had gone to his room, thatI was able to follow the trend of his thoughts. He led me          
back into the banqueting-hall, his bedroom candle in hishand, and he held it up against the time-stained portrait onthe wall. `Do you see anything there?' I looked at the broad plumed hat, the curling love-locks, the white lace collar, and the straight, severe facewhich was framed between them. It was not a brutalcountenance, but it was prim, hard, and stern, with a firm-set, thin-lipped mouth, and a coldly intolerant eye. `Is it like anyone you know?' `There is something of Sir Henry about the jaw.' `Just a suggestion, perhaps. But wait an instant!' Hestood upon a chair, and, holding up the light in his lefthand, he curved his right arm over the broad hat andround the long ringlets. `Good heavens!' I cried, in amazement. The face of Stapleton had sprung out of the canvas. `Ha, you see it now. My eyes have been trained toexamine faces and not their trimmings. It is the first qualityof a criminal investigator that he should see through adisguise.' `But this is marvellous. It might be his portrait.' `Yes, it is an interesting instance of a throwback, whichappears to be both physical and spiritual. A study of family          
portraits is enough to convert a man to the doctrine ofreincarnation. The fellow is a Baskerville--that is evident.' `With designs upon the succession.' `Exactly. This chance of the picture has supplied uswith one of our most obvious missing links. We have him,Watson, we have him, and I dare swear that before to-morrow night he will be fluttering in our net as helpless asone of his own butterflies. A pin, a cork, and a card, andwe add him to the Baker Street collection!' He burst intoone of his rare fits of laughter as he turned away from thepicture. I have not heard him laugh often, and it hasalways boded ill to somebody. I was up betimes in the morning, but Holmes was afootearlier still, for I saw him as I dressed, coming up thedrive. `Yes, we should have a full day to-day,' he remarked,and he rubbed his hands with the joy of action. `The netsare all in place, and the drag is about to begin. We'll knowbefore the day is out whether we have caught our big,lean-jawed pike, or whether he has got through themeshes.' `Have you been on the moor already?' `I have sent a report from Grimpen to Princetown as tothe death of Selden. I think I can promise that none of          
you will be troubled in the matter. And I have alsocommunicated with my faithful Cartwright, who wouldcertainly have pined away at the door of my hut, as a dogdoes at his master's grave, if I had not set his mind at restabout my safety.' `What is the next move?' `To see Sir Henry. Ah, here he is!' `Good morning, Holmes,' said the baronet. `You looklike a general who is planning a battle with his chief of thestaff.' `That is the exact situation. Watson was asking fororders.' `And so do I.' `Very good. You are engaged, as I understand, to dinewith our friends the Stapletons to-night.' `I hope that you will come also. They are veryhospitable people, and I am sure that they would be veryglad to see you.' `I fear that Watson and I must go to London.' `To London?' `Yes, I think that we should be more useful there at thepresent juncture.' The baronet's face perceptibly lengthened.          
 `I hoped that you were going to see me through thisbusiness. The Hall and the moor are not very pleasantplaces when one is alone.' `My dear fellow, you must trust me implicitly and doexactly what I tell you. You can tell your friends that weshould have been happy to have come with you, but thaturgent business required us to be in town. We hope verysoon to return to Devonshire. Will you remember to givethem that message?' `If you insist upon it.' `There is no alternative, I assure you.' I saw by the baronet's clouded brow that he was deeplyhurt by what he regarded as our desertion. `When do you desire to go?' he asked coldly. `Immediately after breakfast. We will drive in toCoombe Tracey, but Watson will leave his things as apledge that he will come back to you. Watson, you willsend a note to Stapleton to tell him that you regret thatyou cannot come.' `I have a good mind to go to London with you,' saidthe baronet. `Why should I stay here alone?' `Because it is your post of duty. Because you gave meyour word that you would do as you were told, and I tellyou to stay.'          
  `All right, then, I'll stay.'  `One more direction! I wish you to drive to MerripitHouse. Send back your trap, however, and let them knowthat you intend to walk home.'  `To walk across the moor?'  `Yes.'  `But that is the very thing which you have so oftencautioned me not to do.'  `This time you may do it with safety. If I had not everyconfidence in your nerve and courage I would not suggestit, but it is essential that you should do it.'  `Then I will do it.'  `And as you value your life do not go across the moorin any direction save along the straight path which leadsfrom Merripit House to the Grimpen Road, and is yournatural way home.'  `I will do just what you say.'  `Very good. I should be glad to get away as soon afterbreakfast as possible, so as to reach London in theafternoon.'  I was much astounded by this programme, though Iremembered that Holmes had said to Stapleton on thenight before that his visit would terminate next day. It hadnot crossed my mind, however, that he would wish me togo with him, nor could I understand how we could bothbe absent at a moment which he himself declared to becritical. There was nothing for it, however, but implicitobedience; so we bade good-bye to our rueful friend, anda couple of hours afterwards we were at the station ofCoombe Tracey and had dispatched the trap upon itsreturn journey. A small boy was waiting upon theplatform. `Any orders, sir?' `You will take this train to town, Cartwright. Themoment you arrive you will send a wire to Sir HenryBaskerville, in my name, to say that if he finds the pocket-book which I have dropped he is to send it by registeredpost to Baker Street.' `Yes, sir.' `And ask at the station office if there is a message forme.' The boy returned with a telegram, which Holmeshanded to me. It ran: `Wire received. Coming down withunsigned warrant. Arrive five-forty.--LESTRADE.' `That is in answer to mine of this morning. He is thebest of the professionals, I think, and we may need hisassistance. Now, Watson, I think that we cannot employ          
our time better than by calling upon your acquaintance,Mrs. Laura Lyons.' His plan of campaign was beginning to be evident. Hewould use the baronet in order to convince the Stapletonsthat we were really gone, while we should actually returnat the instant when we were likely to be needed. Thattelegram from London, if mentioned by Sir Henry to theStapletons, must remove the last suspicions from theirminds. Already I seemed to see our nets drawing closeraround that lean-jawed pike. Mrs. Laura Lyons was in her office, and SherlockHolmes opened his interview with a frankness anddirectness which considerably amazed her. `I am investigating the circumstances which attendedthe death of the late Sir Charles Baskerville,' said he. `Myfriend here, Dr. Watson, has informed me of what youhave communicated, and also of what you have withheldin connection with that matter.' `What have I withheld?' she asked defiantly. `You have confessed that you asked Sir Charles to be atthe gate at ten o'clock. We know that that was the placeand hour of his death. You have withheld what theconnection is between these events.' `There is no connection.'          
 `In that case the coincidence must indeed be anextraordinary one. But I think that we shall succeed inestablishing a connection after all. I wish to be perfectlyfrank with you, Mrs. Lyons. We regard this case as one ofmurder, and the evidence may implicate not only yourfriend Mr. Stapleton, but his wife as well.' The lady sprang from her chair. `His wife!' she cried. `The fact is no longer a secret. The person who haspassed for his sister is really his wife.' Mrs. Lyons had resumed her seat. Her hands weregrasping the arms of her chair, and I saw that the pink nailshad turned white with the pressure of her grip. `His wife!' she said again. `His wife! He is not a marriedman.' Sherlock Holmes shrugged his shoulders. `Prove it to me! Prove it to me! And if you can do so--!' The fierce flash of her eyes said more than any words. `I have come prepared to do so,' said Holmes, drawingseveral papers from his pocket. `Here is a photograph ofthe couple taken in York four years ago. It is indorsed`Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur,' but you will have no difficultyin recognizing him, and her also, if you know her bysight. Here are three written descriptions by trustworthy          
witnesses of Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur, who at that timekept St. Oliver's private school. Read them and see if youcan doubt the identity of these people.' She glanced at them, and then looked up at us with theset, rigid face of a desperate woman. `Mr. Holmes,' she said, `this man had offered memarriage on condition that I could get a divorce from myhusband. He has lied to me, the villain, in everyconceivable way. Not one word of truth has he ever toldme. And why--why? I imagined that all was for my ownsake. But now I see that I was never anything but a tool inhis hands. Why should I preserve faith with him whonever kept any with me? Why should I try to shield himfrom the consequences of his own wicked acts? Ask mewhat you like, and there is nothing which I shall holdback. One thing I swear to you, and that is that when Iwrote the letter I never dreamed of any harm to the oldgentleman, who had been my kindest friend.' `I entirely believe you, madam,' said Sherlock Holmes.`The recital of these events must be very painful to you,and perhaps it will make it easier if I tell you whatoccurred, and you can check me if I make any materialmistake. The sending of this letter was suggested to you byStapleton?'          
 `He dictated it.' `I presume that the reason he gave was that you wouldreceive help from Sir Charles for the legal expensesconnected with your divorce?' `Exactly.' `And then after you had sent the letter he dissuaded youfrom keeping the appointment?' `He told me that it would hurt his self-respect that anyother man should find the money for such an object, andthat though he was a poor man himself he would devotehis last penny to removing the obstacles which divided us.' `He appears to be a very consistent character. And thenyou heard nothing until you read the reports of the deathin the paper?' `No.' `And he made you swear to say nothing about yourappointment with Sir Charles?' `He did. He said that the death was a very mysteriousone, and that I should certainly be suspected if the factscame out. He frightened me into remaining silent.' `Quite so. But you had your suspicions?' She hesitated and looked down. `I knew him,' she said. `But if he had kept faith withme I should always have done so with him.'          
 `I think that on the whole you have had a fortunateescape,' said Sherlock Holmes. `You have had him in yourpower and he knew it, and yet you are alive. You havebeen walking for some months very near to the edge of aprecipice. We must wish you good-morning now, Mrs.Lyons, and it is probable that you will very shortly hearfrom us again.' `Our case becomes rounded off, and difficulty afterdifficulty thins away in front of us,' said Holmes as westood waiting for the arrival of the express from town. `Ishall soon be in the position of being able to put into asingle connected narrative one of the most singular andsensational crimes  of modern times.  Students ofcriminology will remember the analogous incidents inGodno, in Little Russia, in the year `66, and of coursethere are the Anderson murders in North Carolina, butthis case possesses some features which are entirely itsown. Even now we have no clear case against this verywily man. But I shall be very much surprised if it is notclear enough before we go to bed this night.' The London express came roaring into the station, anda small, wiry bulldog of a man had sprung from a first-classcarriage. We all three shook hands, and I saw at once fromthe reverential way in which Lestrade gazed at my          
companion that he had learned a good deal since the dayswhen they had first worked together. I could wellremember the scorn which the theories of the reasonerused then to excite in the practical man. `Anything good?' he asked. `The biggest thing for years,' said Holmes. `We havetwo hours before we need think of starting. I think wemight employ it in getting some dinner and then,Lestrade, we will take the London fog out of your throatby giving you a breath of the pure night air of Dartmoor.Never been there? Ah, well, I don't suppose you willforget your first visit.'          
        
    
 One of Sherlock Holmes's defects--if, indeed, one maycall it a defect--was that he was exceedingly loath tocommunicate his full plans to any other person until theinstant of their fulfilment. Partly it came no doubt from hisown masterful nature, which loved to dominate andsurprise those who were around him. Partly also from hisprofessional caution, which urged him never to take anychances. The result, however, was very trying for thosewho were acting as his agents and assistants. I had oftensuffered under it, but never more so than during that longdrive in the darkness. The great ordeal was in front of us;at last we were about to make our final effort, and yetHolmes had said nothing, and I could only surmise whathis course of action would be. My nerves thrilled withanticipation when at last the cold wind upon our faces andthe dark, void spaces on either side of the narrow roadtold me that we were back upon the moor once again.Every stride of the horses and every turn of the wheels wastaking us nearer to our supreme adventure.          
 Our conversation was hampered by the presence of thedriver of the hired wagonette, so that we were forced totalk of trivial matters when our nerves were tense withemotion and anticipation. It was a relief to me, after thatunnatural restraint, when we at last passed Frankland'shouse and knew that we were drawing near to the Halland to the scene of action. We did not drive up to thedoor but got down near the gate of the avenue. Thewagonette was paid off and ordered to return to CoombeTracey forthwith, while we started to walk to MerripitHouse. `Are you armed, Lestrade?' The little detective smiled. `As long as I have my trousers I have a hip-pocket, andas long as I have my hip-pocket I have something in it.' `Good! My friend and I are also ready for emergencies.' `You're mighty close about this affair, Mr. Holmes.What's the game now?' `A waiting game.' `My word, it does not seem a very cheerful place,' saidthe detective with a shiver, glancing round him at thegloomy slopes of the hill and at the huge lake of fog whichlay over the Grimpen Mire. `I see the lights of a houseahead of us.'          
  `That is Merripit House and the end of our journey. Imust request you to walk on tiptoe and not to talk above awhisper.'  We moved cautiously along the track as if we werebound for the house, but Holmes halted us when we wereabout two hundred yards from it.  `This will do,' said he. `These rocks upon the rightmake an admirable screen.'  `We are to wait here?'  `Yes, we shall make our little ambush here. Get intothis hollow, Lestrade. You have been inside the house,have you not, Watson? Can you tell the position of therooms? What are those latticed windows at this end?'  `I think they are the kitchen windows.'  `And the one beyond, which shines so brightly?'  `That is certainly the dining-room.'  `The blinds are up. You know the lie of the land best.Creep forward quietly and see what they are doing--butfor heaven's sake don't let them know that they arewatched!'  I tiptoed down the path and stooped behind the lowwall which surrounded the stunted orchard. Creeping inits shadow I reached a point whence I could look straightthrough the uncurtained window.          
 There were only two men in the room, Sir Henry andStapleton. They sat with their profiles towards me oneither side of the round table. Both of them were smokingcigars, and coffee and wine were in front of them.Stapleton was talking with animation, but the baronetlooked pale and distrait. Perhaps the thought of that lonelywalk across the ill-omened moor was weighing heavilyupon his mind. As I watched them Stapleton rose and left the room,while Sir Henry filled his glass again and leaned back in hischair, puffing at his cigar. I heard the creak of a door andthe crisp sound of boots upon gravel. The steps passedalong the path on the other side of the wall under which Icrouched. Looking over, I saw the naturalist pause at thedoor of an out-house in the corner of the orchard. A keyturned in a lock, and as he passed in there was a curiousscuffling noise from within. He was only a minute or soinside, and then I heard the key turn once more and hepassed me and re-entered the house. I saw him rejoin hisguest, and I crept quietly back to where my companionswere waiting to tell them what I had seen. `You say, Watson, that the lady is not there?' Holmesasked, when I had finished my report. `No.'          
  `Where can she be, then, since there is no light in anyother room except the kitchen?'  `I cannot think where she is.'  I have said that over the great Grimpen Mire therehung a dense, white fog. It was drifting slowly in ourdirection, and banked itself up like a wall on that side ofus, low, but thick and well defined. The moon shone onit, and it looked like a great shimmering ice-field, with theheads of the distant tors as rocks borne upon its surface.Holmes's face was turned towards it, and he mutteredimpatiently as he watched its sluggish drift.  `It's moving towards us, Watson.'  `Is that serious?'  `Very serious, indeed--the one thing upon earth whichcould have disarranged my plans. He can't be very long,now. It is already ten o'clock. Our success and even hislife may depend upon his coming out before the fog isover the path.'  The night was clear and fine above us. The stars shonecold and bright, while a half-moon bathed the wholescene in a soft, uncertain light. Before us lay the dark bulkof the house, its serrated roof and bristling chimneys hardoutlined against the silver-spangled sky. Broad bars ofgolden light from the lower windows stretched across the          
orchard and the moor. One of them was suddenly shutoff. The servants had left the kitchen. There onlyremained the lamp in the dining-room where the twomen, the murderous host and the unconscious guest, stillchatted over their cigars. Every minute that white woolly plain which coveredone half of the moor was drifting closer and closer to thehouse. Already the first thin wisps of it were curling acrossthe golden square of the lighted window. The farther wallof the orchard was already invisible, and the trees werestanding out of a swirl of white vapour. As we watched itthe fog-wreaths came crawling round both corners of thehouse and rolled slowly into one dense bank, on whichthe upper floor and the roof floated like a strange shipupon a shadowy sea. Holmes struck his hand passionatelyupon the rock in front of us and stamped his feet in hisimpatience. `If he isn't out in a quarter of an hour the path will becovered. In half an hour we won't be able to see ourhands in front of us.' `Shall we move farther back upon higher ground?' `Yes, I think it would be as well.' So as the fog-bank flowed onward we fell back beforeit until we were half a mile from the house, and still that          
dense white sea, with the moon silvering its upper edge,swept slowly and inexorably on. `We are going too far,' said Holmes. `We dare not takethe chance of his being overtaken before he can reach us.At all costs we must hold our ground where we are.' Hedropped on his knees and clapped his ear to the ground.`Thank God, I think that I hear him coming.' A sound of quick steps broke the silence of the moor.Crouching among the stones we stared intently at thesilver-tipped bank in front of us. The steps grew louder,and through the fog, as through a curtain, there steppedthe man whom we were awaiting. He looked round himin surprise as he emerged into the clear, starlit night. Thenhe came swiftly along the path, passed close to where welay, and went on up the long slope behind us. As hewalked he glanced continually over either shoulder, like aman who is ill at ease. `Hist!' cried Holmes, and I heard the sharp click of acocking pistol. `Look out! It's coming!' There was a thin, crisp, continuous patter fromsomewhere in the heart of that crawling bank. The cloudwas within fifty yards of where we lay, and we glared at it,all three, uncertain what horror was about to break fromthe heart of it. I was at Holmes's elbow, and I glanced for          
an instant at his face. It was pale and exultant, his eyesshining brightly in the moonlight. But suddenly theystarted forward in a rigid, fixed stare, and his lips parted inamazement. At the same instant Lestrade gave a yell ofterror and threw himself face downward upon the ground.I sprang to my feet, my inert hand grasping my pistol, mymind paralyzed by the dreadful shape which had sprungout upon us from the shadows of the fog. A hound it was,an enormous coal-black hound, but not such a hound asmortal eyes have ever seen. Fire burst from its openmouth, its eyes glowed with a smouldering glare, itsmuzzle and hackles and dewlap were outlined in flickeringflame. Never in the delirious dream of a disordered braincould anything more savage, more appalling, more hellishbe conceived than that dark form and savage face whichbroke upon us out of the wall of fog. With long bounds the huge black creature was leapingdown the track, following hard upon the footsteps of ourfriend. So paralyzed were we by the apparition that weallowed him to pass before we had recovered our nerve.Then Holmes and I both fired together, and the creaturegave a hideous howl, which showed that one at least hadhit him. He did not pause, however, but boundedonward. Far away on the path we saw Sir Henry looking          
back, his face white in the moonlight, his hands raised inhorror, glaring helplessly at the frightful thing which washunting him down. But that cry of pain from the hound had blown all ourfears to the winds. If he was vulnerable he was mortal, andif we could wound him we could kill him. Never have Iseen a man run as Holmes ran that night. I am reckonedfleet of foot, but he outpaced me as much as I outpacedthe little professional. In front of us as we flew up thetrack we heard scream after scream from Sir Henry andthe deep roar of the hound. I was in time to see the beastspring upon its victim, hurl him to the ground, and worryat his throat. But the next instant Holmes had emptied fivebarrels of his revolver into the creature's flank. With a lasthowl of agony and a vicious snap in the air, it rolled uponits back, four feet pawing furiously, and then fell limpupon its side. I stooped, panting, and pressed my pistol tothe dreadful, shimmering head, but it was useless to pressthe trigger. The giant hound was dead. Sir Henry lay insensible where he had fallen. We toreaway his collar, and Holmes breathed a prayer of gratitudewhen we saw that there was no sign of a wound and thatthe rescue had been in time. Already our friend's eyelidsshivered and he made a feeble effort to move. Lestrade          
thrust his brandy-flask between the baronet's teeth, andtwo frightened eyes were looking up at us. `My God!' he whispered. `What was it? What, inheaven's name, was it?' `It's dead, whatever it is,' said Holmes. `We've laid thefamily ghost once and forever.' In mere size and strength it was a terrible creaturewhich was lying stretched before us. It was not a purebloodhound and it was not a pure mastiff; but it appearedto be a combination of the two--gaunt, savage, and aslarge as a small lioness. Even now, in the stillness of death,the huge jaws seemed to be dripping with a bluish flameand the small, deep-set, cruel eyes were ringed with fire. Iplaced my hand upon the glowing muzzle, and as I heldthem up my own fingers smouldered and gleamed in thedarkness. `Phosphorus,' I said. `A cunning preparation of it,' said Holmes, sniffing atthe dead animal. `There is no smell which might haveinterfered with his power of scent. We owe you a deepapology, Sir Henry, for having exposed you to this fright.I was prepared for a hound, but not for such a creature asthis. And the fog gave us little time to receive him.' `You have saved my life.'          
 `Having first endangered it. Are you strong enough tostand?' `Give me another mouthful of that brandy and I shallbe ready for anything. So! Now, if you will help me up.What do you propose to do?' `To leave you here. You are not fit for furtheradventures to-night. If you will wait, one or other of uswill go back with you to the Hall.' He tried to stagger to his feet; but he was still ghastlypale and trembling in every limb. We helped him to arock, where he sat shivering with his face buried in hishands. `We must leave you now,' said Holmes. `The rest ofour work must be done, and every moment is ofimportance. We have our case, and now we only wantour man. `It's a thousand to one against our finding him at thehouse,' he continued as we retraced our steps swiftly downthe path. `Those shots must have told him that the gamewas up.' `We were some distance off, and this fog may havedeadened them.'          
 `He followed the hound to call him off--of that youmay be certain. No, no, he's gone by this time! But we'llsearch the house and make sure.' The front door was open, so we rushed in and hurriedfrom room to room to the amazement of a doddering oldmanservant, who met us in the passage. There was nolight save in the dining-room, but Holmes caught up thelamp and left no corner of the house unexplored. No signcould we see of the man whom we were chasing. On theupper floor, however, one of the bedroom doors waslocked. `There's someone in here,' cried Lestrade. `I can hear amovement. Open this door!' A faint moaning and rustling came from within.Holmes struck the door just over the lock with the flat ofhis foot and it flew open. Pistol in hand, we all threerushed into the room. But there was no sign within it of that desperate anddefiant villain whom we expected to see. Instead we werefaced by an object so strange and so unexpected that westood for a moment staring at it in amazement. The room had been fashioned into a small museum,and the walls were lined by a number of glass-topped casesfull of that collection of butterflies and moths the          
formation of which had been the relaxation of thiscomplex and dangerous man. In the centre of this roomthere was an upright beam, which had been placed atsome period as a support for the old worm-eaten baulk oftimber which spanned the roof. To this post a figure wastied, so swathed and muffled in the sheets which had beenused to secure it that one could not for the moment tellwhether it was that of a man or a woman. One towelpassed round the throat and was secured at the back of thepillar. Another covered the lower part of the face, andover it two dark eyes--eyes full of grief and shame and adreadful questioning--stared back at us. In a minute wehad torn off the gag, unswathed the bonds, and Mrs.Stapleton sank upon the floor in front of us. As herbeautiful head fell upon her chest I saw the clear red wealof a whiplash across her neck.  `The brute!' cried Holmes. `Here, Lestrade, yourbrandy-bottle! Put her in the chair! She has fainted fromill-usage and exhaustion.'  She opened her eyes again.  `Is he safe?' she asked. `Has he escaped?'  `He cannot escape us, madam.'  `No, no, I did not mean my husband. Sir Henry? Is hesafe?'          
  `Yes.'  `And the hound?'  `It is dead.'  She gave a long sigh of satisfaction.  `Thank God! Thank God! Oh, this villain! See how hehas treated me!' She shot her arms out from her sleeves,and we saw with horror that they were all mottled withbruises. `But this is nothing--nothing! It is my mind andsoul that he has tortured and defiled. I could endure it all,ill-usage, solitude, a life of deception, everything, as longas I could still cling to the hope that I had his love, butnow I know that in this also I have been his dupe and histool.' She broke into passionate sobbing as she spoke.  `You bear him no good will, madam,' said Holmes.`Tell us then where we shall find him. If you have everaided him in evil, help us now and so atone.'  `There is but one place where he can have fled,' sheanswered. `There is an old tin mine on an island in theheart of the mire. It was there that he kept his hound andthere also he had made preparations so that he might havea refuge. That is where he would fly.'  The fog-bank lay like white wool against the window.Holmes held the lamp towards it.          
 `See,' said he. `No one could find his way into theGrimpen Mire to-night.' She laughed and clapped her hands. Her eyes and teethgleamed with fierce merriment. `He may find his way in, but never out,' she cried.`How can he see the guiding wands to-night? We plantedthem together, he and I, to mark the pathway through themire. Oh, if I could only have plucked them out to-day.Then indeed you would have had him at your mercy!' It was evident to us that all pursuit was in vain until thefog had lifted. Meanwhile we left Lestrade in possession ofthe house while Holmes and I went back with the baronetto Baskerville Hall. The story of the Stapletons could nolonger be withheld from him, but he took the blowbravely when he learned the truth about the womanwhom he had loved. But the shock of the night'sadventures had shattered his nerves, and before morninghe lay delirious in a high fever, under the care of Dr.Mortimer. The two of them were destined to traveltogether round the world before Sir Henry had becomeonce more the hale, hearty man that he had been beforehe became master of that ill-omened estate. And now I come rapidly to the conclusion of thissingular narrative, in which I have tried to make the reader          
share those dark fears and vague surmises which cloudedour lives so long and ended in so tragic a manner. On themorning after the death of the hound the fog had liftedand we were guided by Mrs. Stapleton to the point wherethey had found a pathway through the bog. It helped us torealize the horror of this woman's life when we saw theeagerness and joy with which she laid us on her husband'strack. We left her standing upon the thin peninsula offirm, peaty soil which tapered out into the widespreadbog. From the end of it a small wand planted here andthere showed where the path zigzagged from tuft to tuft ofrushes among those green-scummed pits and foulquagmires which barred the way to the stranger. Rankreeds and lush, slimy water-plants sent an odour of decayand a heavy miasmatic vapour onto our faces, while a falsestep plunged us more than once thigh-deep into the dark,quivering mire, which shook for yards in soft undulationsaround our feet. Its tenacious grip plucked at our heels aswe walked, and when we sank into it it was as if somemalignant hand was tugging us down into those obscenedepths, so grim and purposeful was the clutch in which itheld us. Once only we saw a trace that someone hadpassed that perilous way before us. From amid a tuft ofcotton grass which bore it up out of the slime some dark          
thing was projecting. Holmes sank to his waist as hestepped from the path to seize it, and had we not beenthere to drag him out he could never have set his footupon firm land again. He held an old black boot in the air.`Meyers, Toronto,' was printed on the leather inside.  `It is worth a mud bath,' said he. `It is our friend SirHenry's missing boot.'  `Thrown there by Stapleton in his flight.'  `Exactly. He retained it in his hand after using it to setthe hound upon the track. He fled when he knew thegame was up, still clutching it. And he hurled it away atthis point of his flight. We know at least that he came sofar in safety.'  But more than that we were never destined to know,though there was much which we might surmise. Therewas no chance of finding footsteps in the mire, for therising mud oozed swiftly in upon them, but as we at lastreached firmer ground beyond the morass we all lookedeagerly for them. But no slightest sign of them ever metour eyes. If the earth told a true story, then Stapletonnever reached that island of refuge towards which hestruggled through the fog upon that last night. Somewherein the heart of the great Grimpen Mire, down in the foul          
slime of the huge morass which had sucked him in, thiscold and cruel-hearted man is forever buried. Many traces we found of him in the bog-girt islandwhere he had hid his savage ally. A huge driving-wheeland a shaft half-filled with rubbish showed the position ofan abandoned mine. Beside it were the crumbling remainsof the cottages of the miners, driven away no doubt by thefoul reek of the surrounding swamp. In one of these astaple and chain with a quantity of gnawed bones showedwhere the animal had been confined. A skeleton with atangle of brown hair adhering to it lay among the debris. `A dog!' said Holmes. `By Jove, a curly-haired spaniel.Poor Mortimer will never see his pet again. Well, I do notknow that this place contains any secret which we havenot already fathomed. He could hide his hound, but hecould not hush its voice, and hence came those crieswhich even in daylight were not pleasant to hear. On anemergency he could keep the hound in the out-house atMerripit, but it was always a risk, and it was only on thesupreme day, which he regarded as the end of all hisefforts, that he dared do it. This paste in the tin is nodoubt the luminous mixture with which the creature wasdaubed. It was suggested, of course, by the story of thefamily hell-hound, and by the desire to frighten old Sir          
Charles to death. No wonder the poor devil of a convictran and screamed, even as our friend did, and as weourselves might have done, when he saw such a creaturebounding through the darkness of the moor upon histrack. It was a cunning device, for, apart from the chanceof driving your victim to his death, what peasant wouldventure to inquire too closely into such a creature shouldhe get sight of it, as many have done, upon the moor? Isaid it in London, Watson, and I say it again now, thatnever yet have we helped to hunt down a more dangerousman than he who is lying yonder'--he swept his long armtowards the huge mottled expanse of green-splotched bogwhich stretched away until it merged into the russet slopesof the moor.          
        
        A Retrospection It was the end of November and Holmes and I sat,upon a raw and foggy night, on either side of a blazing firein our sitting-room in Baker Street. Since the tragicupshot of our visit to Devonshire he had been engaged intwo affairs of the utmost importance, in the first of whichhe had exposed the atrocious conduct of Colonel Upwoodin connection with the famous card scandal of theNonpareil Club, while in the second he had defended theunfortunate Mme. Montpensier from the charge ofmurder which hung over her in connection with thedeath of her step-daughter, Mlle. Carere, the young ladywho, as it will be remembered, was found six months lateralive and married in New York. My friend was inexcellent spirits over the success which had attended asuccession of difficult and important cases, so that I wasable to induce him to discuss the details of the Baskervillemystery. I had waited patiently for the opportunity, for Iwas aware that he would never permit cases to overlap,and that his clear and logical mind would not be drawnfrom its present work to dwell upon memories of the past.          
Sir Henry and Dr. Mortimer were, however, in London,on their way to that long voyage which had beenrecommended for the restoration of his shattered nerves.They had called upon us that very afternoon, so that it wasnatural that the subject should come up for discussion. `The whole course of events,' said Holmes, `from thepoint of view of the man who called himself Stapleton wassimple and direct, although to us, who had no means inthe beginning of knowing the motives of his actions andcould only learn part of the facts, it all appearedexceedingly complex. I have had the advantage of twoconversations with Mrs. Stapleton, and the case has nowbeen so entirely cleared up that I am not aware that thereis anything which has remained a secret to us. You willfind a few notes upon the matter under the heading B inmy indexed list of cases.' `Perhaps you would kindly give me a sketch of thecourse of events from memory.' `Certainly, though I cannot guarantee that I carry allthe facts in my mind. Intense mental concentration has acurious way of blotting out what has passed. The barristerwho has his case at his fingers' ends, and is able to arguewith an expert upon his own subject finds that a week ortwo of the courts will drive it all out of his head once          
more. So each of my cases displaces the last, and Mlle.Carere has blurred my recollection of Baskerville Hall.To-morrow some other little problem may be submittedto my notice which will in turn dispossess the fair Frenchlady and the infamous Upwood. So far as the case of theHound goes, however, I will give you the course of eventsas nearly as I can, and you will suggest anything which Imay have forgotten. `My inquiries show beyond all question that the familyportrait did not lie, and that this fellow was indeed aBaskerville. He was a son of that Rodger Baskerville, theyounger brother of Sir Charles, who fled with a sinisterreputation to South America, where he was said to havedied unmarried. He did, as a matter of fact, marry, and hadone child, this fellow, whose real name is the same as hisfather's. He married Beryl Garcia, one of the beauties ofCosta Rica, and, having purloined a considerable sum ofpublic money, he changed his name to Vandeleur and fledto England, where he established a school in the east ofYorkshire. His reason for attempting this special line ofbusiness was that he had struck up an acquaintance with aconsumptive tutor upon the voyage home, and that hehad used this man's ability to make the undertaking asuccess. Fraser, the tutor, died however, and the school          
which had begun well sank from disrepute into infamy.The Vandeleurs found it convenient to change their nameto Stapleton, and he brought the remains of his fortune,his schemes for the future, and his taste for entomology tothe south of England. I learned at the British Museum thathe was a recognized authority upon the subject, and thatthe name of Vandeleur has been permanently attached to acertain moth which he had, in his Yorkshire days, beenthe first to describe. `We now come to that portion of his life which hasproved to be of such intense interest to us. The fellow hadevidently made inquiry and found that only two livesintervened between him and a valuable estate. When hewent to Devonshire his plans were, I believe, exceedinglyhazy, but that he meant mischief from the first is evidentfrom the way in which he took his wife with him in thecharacter of his sister. The idea of using her as a decoy wasclearly already in his mind, though he may not have beencertain how the details of his plot were to be arranged. Hemeant in the end to have the estate, and he was ready touse any tool or run any risk for that end. His first act wasto establish himself as near to his ancestral home as hecould, and his second was to cultivate a friendship with SirCharles Baskerville and with the neighbours.          
 `The baronet himself told him about the family hound,and so prepared the way for his own death. Stapleton, as Iwill continue to call him, knew that the old man's heartwas weak and that a shock would kill him. So much hehad learned from Dr. Mortimer. He had heard also that SirCharles was superstitious and had taken this grim legendvery seriously. His ingenious mind instantly suggested away by which the baronet could be done to death, and yetit would be hardly possible to bring home the guilt to thereal murderer. `Having conceived the idea he proceeded to carry itout with considerable finesse. An ordinary schemer wouldhave been content to work with a savage hound. The useof artificial means to make the creature diabolical was aflash of genius upon his part. The dog he bought inLondon from Ross and Mangles, the dealers in FulhamRoad. It was the strongest and most savage in theirpossession. He brought it down by the North Devon lineand walked a great distance over the moor so as to get ithome without exciting any remarks. He had already on hisinsect hunts learned to penetrate the Grimpen Mire, andso had found a safe hiding-place for the creature. Here hekennelled it and waited his chance.          
  `But it was some time coming. The old gentlemancould not be decoyed outside of his grounds at night.Several times Stapleton lurked about with his hound, butwithout avail. It was during these fruitless quests that he,or rather his ally, was seen by peasants, and that the legendof the demon dog received a new confirmation. He hadhoped that his wife might lure Sir Charles to his ruin, buthere she proved unexpectedly independent. She wouldnot endeavour to entangle the old gentleman in asentimental attachment which might deliver him over tohis enemy. Threats and even, I am sorry to say, blowsrefused to move her. She would have nothing to do withit, and for a time Stapleton was at a deadlock.  `He found a way out of his difficulties through thechance that Sir Charles, who had conceived a friendshipfor him, made him the minister of his charity in the caseof this unfortunate woman, Mrs. Laura Lyons. Byrepresenting himself as a single man he acquired completeinfluence over her, and he gave her to understand that inthe event of her obtaining a divorce from her husband hewould marry her. His plans were suddenly brought to ahead by his knowledge that Sir Charles was about to leavethe Hall on the advice of Dr. Mortimer, with whoseopinion he himself pretended to coincide. He must act at          
once, or his victim might get beyond his power. Hetherefore put pressure upon Mrs. Lyons to write this letter,imploring the old man to give her an interview on theevening before his departure for London. He then, by aspecious argument, prevented her from going, and so hadthe chance for which he had waited. `Driving back in the evening from Coombe Tracey hewas in time to get his hound, to treat it with his infernalpaint, and to bring the beast round to the gate at which hehad reason to expect that he would find the old gentlemanwaiting. The dog, incited by its master, sprang over thewicket-gate and pursued the unfortunate baronet, whofled screaming down the Yew Alley. In that gloomytunnel it must indeed have been a dreadful sight to see thathuge black creature, with its flaming jaws and blazing eyes,bounding after its victim. He fell dead at the end of thealley from heart disease and terror. The hound had keptupon the grassy border while the baronet had run downthe path, so that no track but the man's was visible. Onseeing him lying still the creature had probably approachedto sniff at him, but finding him dead had turned awayagain. It was then that it left the print which was actuallyobserved by Dr. Mortimer. The hound was called off andhurried away to its lair in the Grimpen Mire, and a          
mystery was left which puzzled the authorities, alarmedthe country-side, and finally brought the case within thescope of our observation. `So much for the death of Sir Charles Baskerville. Youperceive the devilish cunning of it, for really it would bealmost impossible to make a case against the real murderer.His only accomplice was one who could never give himaway, and the grotesque, inconceivable nature of thedevice only served to make it more effective. Both of thewomen concerned in the case, Mrs. Stapleton and Mrs.Laura Lyons, were left with a strong suspicion againstStapleton. Mrs. Stapleton knew that he had designs uponthe old man, and also of the existence of the hound. Mrs.Lyons knew neither of these things, but had beenimpressed by the death occurring at the time of anuncancelled appointment which was only known to him.However, both of them were under his influence, and hehad nothing to fear from them. The first half of his taskwas successfully accomplished but the more difficult stillremained. `It is possible that Stapleton did not know of theexistence of an heir in Canada. In any case he would verysoon learn it from his friend Dr. Mortimer, and he wastold by the latter all details about the arrival of Henry          
Baskerville. Stapleton's first idea was that this youngstranger from Canada might possibly be done to death inLondon without coming down to Devonshire at all. Hedistrusted his wife ever since she had refused to help himin laying a trap for the old man, and he dared not leaveher long out of his sight for fear he should lose hisinfluence over her. It was for this reason that he took herto London with him. They lodged, I find, at theMexborough Private Hotel, in Craven Street, which wasactually one of those called upon by my agent in search ofevidence. Here he kept his wife imprisoned in her roomwhile he, disguised in a beard, followed Dr. Mortimer toBaker Street and afterwards to the station and to theNorthumberland Hotel. His wife had some inkling of hisplans; but she had such a fear of her husband--a fearfounded upon brutal ill-treatment--that she dare not writeto warn the man whom she knew to be in danger. If theletter should fall into Stapleton's hands her own life wouldnot be safe. Eventually, as we know, she adopted theexpedient of cutting out the words which would form themessage, and addressing the letter in a disguised hand. Itreached the baronet, and gave him the first warning of hisdanger.          
 `It was very essential for Stapleton to get some article ofSir Henry's attire so that, in case he was driven to use thedog, he might always have the means of setting him uponhis track. With characteristic promptness and audacity heset about this at once, and we cannot doubt that the bootsor chamber-maid of the hotel was well bribed to help himin his design. By chance, however, the first boot whichwas procured for him was a new one and, therefore,useless for his purpose. He then had it returned andobtained another--a most instructive incident, since itproved conclusively to my mind that we were dealingwith a real hound, as no other supposition could explainthis anxiety to obtain an old boot and this indifference to anew one. The more outre and grotesque an incident is themore carefully it deserves to be examined, and the verypoint which appears to complicate a case is, when dulyconsidered and scientifically handled, the one which ismost likely to elucidate it. `Then we had the visit from our friends next morning,shadowed always by Stapleton in the cab. From hisknowledge of our rooms and of my appearance, as well asfrom his general conduct, I am inclined to think thatStapleton's career of crime has been by no means limitedto this single Baskerville affair. It is suggestive that during          
the last three years there have been four considerableburglaries in the West Country, for none of which wasany criminal ever arrested. The last of these, at FolkestoneCourt, in May, was remarkable for the cold-bloodedpistoling of the page, who surprised the masked andsolitary burglar. I cannot doubt that Stapleton recruited hiswaning resources in this fashion, and that for years he hasbeen a desperate and dangerous man. `We had an example of his readiness of resource thatmorning when he got away from us so successfully, andalso of his audacity in sending back my own name to methrough the cabman. From that moment he understoodthat I had taken over the case in London, and thattherefore there was no chance for him there. He returnedto Dartmoor and awaited the arrival of the baronet.' `One moment!' said I. `You have, no doubt, describedthe sequence of events correctly, but there is one pointwhich you have left unexplained. What became of thehound when its master was in London?' `I have given some attention to this matter and it isundoubtedly of importance. There can be no question thatStapleton had a confidant, though it is unlikely that heever placed himself in his power by sharing all his planswith him. There was an old manservant at Merripit          
House, whose name was Anthony. His connection withthe Stapletons can be traced for several years, as far back asthe schoolmastering days, so that he must have been awarethat his master and mistress were really husband and wife.This man has disappeared and has escaped from thecountry. It is suggestive that Anthony is not a commonname in England, while Antonio is so in all Spanish orSpanish-American countries. The man, like Mrs. Stapletonherself, spoke good English, but with a curious lispingaccent. I have myself seen this old man cross the GrimpenMire by the path which Stapleton had marked out. It isvery probable, therefore, that in the absence of his masterit was he who cared for the hound, though he may neverhave known the purpose for which the beast was used. `The Stapletons then went down to Devonshire,whither they were soon followed by Sir Henry and you.One word now as to how I stood myself at that time. Itmay possibly recur to your memory that when I examinedthe paper upon which the printed words were fastened Imade a close inspection for the water-mark. In doing so Iheld it within a few inches of my eyes, and was consciousof a faint smell of the scent known as white jessamine.There are seventy-five perfumes, which it is very necessarythat a criminal expert should be able to distinguish from          
each other, and cases have more than once within myown experience depended upon their prompt recognition.The scent suggested the presence of a lady, and already mythoughts began to turn towards the Stapletons. Thus I hadmade certain of the hound, and had guessed at thecriminal before ever we went to the west country. `It was my game to watch Stapleton. It was evident,however, that I could not do this if I were with you, sincehe would be keenly on his guard. I deceived everybody,therefore, yourself included, and I came down secretlywhen I was supposed to be in London. My hardships werenot so great as you imagined, though such trifling detailsmust never interfere with the investigation of a case. Istayed for the most part at Coombe Tracey, and only usedthe hut upon the moor when it was necessary to be nearthe scene of action. Cartwright had come down with me,and in his disguise as a country boy he was of greatassistance to me. I was dependent upon him for food andclean linen. When I was watching Stapleton, Cartwrightwas frequently watching you, so that I was able to keepmy hand upon all the strings. `I have already told you that your reports reached merapidly, being forwarded instantly from Baker Street toCoombe Tracey. They were of great service to me, and          
especially that one incidentally truthful piece of biographyof Stapleton's. I was able to establish the identity of theman and the woman and knew at last exactly how I stood.The case had been considerably complicated through theincident of the escaped convict and the relations betweenhim and the Barrymores. This also you cleared up in avery effective way, though I had already come to the sameconclusions from my own observations. `By the time that you discovered me upon the moor Ihad a complete knowledge of the whole business, but Ihad not a case which could go to a jury. Even Stapleton'sattempt upon Sir Henry that night which ended in thedeath of the unfortunate convict did not help us much inproving murder against our man. There seemed to be noalternative but to catch him red-handed, and to do so wehad to use Sir Henry, alone and apparently unprotected, asa bait. We did so, and at the cost of a severe shock to ourclient we succeeded in completing our case and drivingStapleton to his destruction. That Sir Henry should havebeen exposed to this is, I must confess, a reproach to mymanagement of the case, but we had no means offoreseeing the terrible and paralyzing spectacle which thebeast presented, nor could we predict the fog whichenabled him to burst upon us at such short notice. We          
succeeded in our object at a cost which both the specialistand Dr. Mortimer assure me will be a temporary one. Along journey may enable our friend to recover not onlyfrom his shattered nerves but also from his woundedfeelings. His love for the lady was deep and sincere, and tohim the saddest part of all this black business was that heshould have been deceived by her. `It only remains to indicate the part which she hadplayed throughout. There can be no doubt that Stapletonexercised an influence over her which may have been loveor may have been fear, or very possibly both, since theyare by no means incompatible emotions. It was, at least,absolutely effective. At his command she consented to passas his sister, though he found the limits of his power overher when he endeavoured to make her the directaccessory to murder. She was ready to warn Sir Henry sofar as she could without implicating her husband, andagain and again she tried to do so. Stapleton himself seemsto have been capable of jealousy, and when he saw thebaronet paying court to the lady, even though it was partof his own plan, still he could not help interrupting with apassionate outburst which revealed the fiery soul which hisself-contained  manner   so  cleverly concealed. Byencouraging the intimacy he made it certain that Sir          
Henry would frequently come to Merripit House and thathe would sooner or later get the opportunity which hedesired. On the day of the crisis, however, his wife turnedsuddenly against him. She had learned something of thedeath of the convict, and she knew that the hound wasbeing kept in the out-house on the evening that Sir Henrywas coming to dinner. She taxed her husband with hisintended crime, and a furious scene followed, in which heshowed her for the first time that she had a rival in hislove. Her fidelity turned in an instant to bitter hatred andhe saw that she would betray him. He tied her up,therefore, that she might have no chance of warning SirHenry, and he hoped, no doubt, that when the wholecountry-side put down the baronet's death to the curse ofhis family, as they certainly would do, he could win hiswife back to accept an accomplished fact and to keep silentupon what she knew. In this I fancy that in any case hemade a miscalculation, and that, if we had not been there,his doom would none the less have been sealed. A womanof Spanish blood does not condone such an injury solightly. And now, my dear Watson, without referring tomy notes, I cannot give you a more detailed account ofthis curious case. I do not know that anything essential hasbeen left unexplained.'          
 `He could not hope to frighten Sir Henry to death ashe had done the old uncle with his bogie hound.' `The beast was savage and half-starved. If its appearancedid not frighten its victim to death, at least it wouldparalyze the resistance which might be offered.' `No doubt. There only remains one difficulty. IfStapleton came into the succession, how could he explainthe fact that he, the heir, had been living unannouncedunder another name so close to the property? How couldhe claim it without causing suspicion and inquiry?' `It is a formidable difficulty, and I fear that you ask toomuch when you expect me to solve it. The past and thepresent are within the field of my inquiry, but what a manmay do in the future is a hard question to answer. Mrs.Stapleton has heard her husband discuss the problem onseveral occasions. There were three possible courses. Hemight claim the property from South America, establishhis identity before the British authorities there and soobtain the fortune without ever coming to England at all;or he might adopt an elaborate disguise during the shorttime that he need be in London; or, again, he mightfurnish an accomplice with the proofs and papers, puttinghim in as heir, and retaining a claim upon someproportion of his income. We cannot doubt from what we          
know of him that he would have found some way out ofthe difficulty. And now, my dear Watson, we have hadsome weeks of severe work, and for one evening, I think,we may turn our thoughts into more pleasant channels. Ihave a box for `Les Huguenots.' Have you heard the DeReszkes? Might I trouble you then to be ready in half anhour, and we can stop at Marcini's for a little dinner onthe way?'         